# Being Integrity 

**Transcriptions**

Dev Priyānanda Svāmī Bhagavān

**Playlist Link:** [YouTube](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nbbaq9BkuvA&list=PL8s1kPtHmCZI5gpsQHBcob3EXsFwcO7Si)

**Integrity** is based on the principle of **truthfulness**: keeping one’s word. Integrity has to be based on something **real**; thus integrity cannot refer to a corporation, religion, nation-state or other **abstraction**. Integrity is meaningful only in the context of an **individual**: ‘a man or woman of integrity.’ Integrity is how to live with a **clean conscience**.

## Episode 0—Introduction

**Video link:** [YouTube](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nbbaq9BkuvA&list=PL8s1kPtHmCZI5gpsQHBcob3EXsFwcO7Si&index=1)

_Āya Bhuwan:_ may you live long! Welcome to **Being Integrity**. This is going to be a series—quite an extensive series, I think—about **integrity and the Buddha’s teaching**.

Now integrity is based on **truthfulness**. We hear these days a lot of talk about ‘integrity in business’. But this is actually an **oxymoron**. For those of you who aren’t on good terms with your dictionary, an oxymoron means a self-contradictory statement, like **military intelligence** or **integrity in business**.

Because what’s the first thing you do when you start a business? You file a **fictitious name statement** and then you incorporate, and your incorporation is simply some **words on paper** and signed by a few people. And then suddenly you have this entity that has all the rights of a person! Of course a corporation isn’t a person; it’s a **lie**, and so is the name. The whole thing is a **fabrication**.

So in that context **how can you have any integrity**? It’s just self-contradictory, oxymoronic to have integrity in the context of a corporation. It’s just impossible.

Of course one can have personal integrity himself. But then to work for a corporation is definitely a breach of personal integrity, because that means you’re recognizing an entity that’s fictitious! Anyway, so we’re not going to talk about integrity in the context of business and we’re not going to talk about it in the context of religion either.

Because religion is also a **fabrication**. You might say well you’re a monkey or in the ‘buddhist’ religion, but actually there is no such thing as ‘buddhism’. As another ‘buddhist’ monk, Buddhadāsa Bhikkhu has kindly pointed out, that religions are also **fabrications**. They are also **abstractions**; they also have **no real physical existence**. They’re just **information**, they’re just **software**. So what to speak of talking about corporate context, it’s **meaningless** to talk about integrity in a **religious context** as well.

What **is** meaningful, however, is to talk about a **man** of integrity, a **person** of integrity; and Buddha used the word _sappurisā_. _Sappurisā_ is a combination of _sat_ and _purisā._ _Sat_ means **truthful** or actually, eternally existing, and eternal is real being. A temporary being is only fabricated, phony being; but eternal being is real being. So that kind of man, _purisā_, who is eternal who has eternal values, eternal verities and truths, is known as a _sappurisā._

_Sappurisā_ is a man of integrity. So we’re talking here about how to transform your being into that of a _sappurisā,_ a man of integrity. Because integrity is not something you **have**—that would make it a virtue. And that would make it disposable, dispensable or changeable. But we’re talking about a type of integrity that is so deep that it’s integrated with your very being: integral integrity, wholeness; _sappurisā,_ eternal truths.

It’s based on something beyond this temporary existence, temporary being and temporary meanings. And what is that? Well, the Buddha’s teaching, of course. But there are also very specific things that we can use to measure a person’s **degree of integrity**, and we’re going to be going into this in great detail in subsequent episodes.

Being Integrity is based on the teaching of the Buddha. But **what is** the teaching of the Buddha? I already said it’s not a religion. Some people claim that it’s a philosophy, but it’s not really a philosophy either. The teaching of the Buddha is something unique. It’s something that has never existed before. It’s something that we don’t even have a word for in western languages, because it’s completely transcendent. It’s not based on the concept of God, it’s not even based on the concept of the Complete Whole of **monism** or **oneness**; it’s beyond even **that**.

So the Buddha has gone to a dimension that nobody has reached before—at least in historical times—and this is his unique contribution to the welfare of all humanity. So this teaching, the teaching of the Buddha, being beyond everything else, it doesn’t really have a proper name. The only thing you can call it is **the Dhamma**.

And _dhamma,_ as we’ve discussed in two other videos in this series, _dhamma_ is simply **what is**. Not only what **is**—the **way** it is. And not only the **way** it is, but **why** it is the way it is. This is the Buddha’s Dhamma and this is what he was teaching to his disciples. That’s going to be the basis of this entire series.

In fact it’s not even correct to call the teaching of the Buddha a spiritual path, because the Buddha makes no distinction between material and spiritual, the way to dualistic Western religions and philosophies do. For the Buddha, **what is, is**; and it’s neither material or spiritual—it’s just **what is**. It’s just **_dhamma_**_._

So the Buddha, the path of the Buddha, the teaching of the Buddha, is not really a religion, a philosophy or even a spiritual discipline. It’s something that is unique and has no equivalent in any other path. That’s why we call it simply **the Dhamma**, the **way it is**.

Now a lot of people criticize Buddhism because it has **so many rules**, or **precepts** as we like to call it. There are ten basic precepts, starting with no lying, no stealing, no killing and so on. Well, why do we have so many rules? The monks follow 227 precepts, and even those don’t really explain everything.

So there are rules because there is _karma_ or _kamma,_ as it’s called in Pāḷī. _Kamma_ is simply the result, the equal and opposite result of any action. So if I harm someone, if I hurt someone, if I steal from someone, then that’s going to come back to me, and I will suffer the **identical pain** that I have caused.

And also there’s good _kamma_ as well, but the art of creating good _kamma_ is very difficult for most Westerners, because it involves “religious” or spiritual activities, and we don’t want to believe in something. So we’re going to give a **scientific basis** for right and wrong—a scientific basis based on the theory of _kamma_ or more technically correct, **Dependent Origination** (_paṭicca-samuppāda_) as it was described by the Buddha.

The **law of _kamma_** has very scientific principles behind it—and they begin with our **intention**, and our **conception** of the world and ourselves. These form **causes**, which produce **effects**. Among those effects are **becoming**, and **being** and **birth**.

So the **birth** that we have, the **existence** that we have, the **being** that we have, is because of a **process of becoming**. And this process of becoming has certain definite laws and rules. And we can learn these, we can use them to create a more **ideal form of being** for ourselves; and in this way we can rise above the problem of _kamma_ that causes suffering and rebirth.

That’s basically the essence of the Buddha’s path. So the benefits of precepts like **mindfulness, purity, meditation** and so on… “Well, what are the benefits of these things? Can they be measured?” **Yes**, it’s a fact, they **can** be measured.

When we see a person who’s receiving the results of good _kamma,_ we want to **emulate** them; we want to **follow** them, because we see that they’re enjoying life at a **higher standard** than ours. So, how does a person get into that position? How do they get into that situation, where their _kamma_ is so good that they get the things that we want in life: love, attention, money, power, and so on—beauty, intelligence—like that.

These things are all the result of a **good birth**. And to get a good birth, one has to create the **causes** for that birth. So there’s a scientific process of creating _kamma_, and the benefits of that _kamma_ are measurable, not only in the next life but even in this one.

It’s said, for example, that ‘virtue is its own reward’. I would change that a little bit I would say, “**Integrity is its own reward**.” Integrity gives a kind of personal satisfaction that cannot be replaced by any amount of sense enjoyment. After all, sense enjoyment comes and goes. It’s nice when it happens; and when it doesn’t happen, then if we’re desiring it we’ll miss it, we’ll feel incomplete and will be consumed with the suffering of **desire**, another kind of suffering.

So by adopting the rules and regulations of the Buddha’s path, we **shield** ourselves from creating bad _kamma_, and we also open the door to creating good _kamma,_ _subha-kamma,_ or auspicious or beneficial _kamma,_ that in the future will give us **tremendous well-being** and an increase in all kinds of happiness and felicity.

So right and wrong, good and bad aren’t just **beliefs**; they’re not just morality, at least in the Buddha’s teaching. Maybe in some other teachings or other cultures they are, but in Buddhist culture all these things are based on **scientific conclusions** of the Buddha's **self-observation**.

You might say, “Well, that’s fine for the Buddha, but what about **me**?” The answer is, **you** can carry out the same observations on your own self, in your own life, and in your own time, by following the Buddha’s methods. They still work today, and they work for everyone. **Everyone** has access to a **laboratory** where they can perform the same experiments as the Buddha, and in that way verify the principles of the Buddha’s teaching that will give us the **integrity** that we seek.

We **know** you have a lot of questions. I had a lot of questions when I first came in contact with the Buddha’s teaching, and we all have a lot of questions about **integrity**. But this seminar, this series of videos, is designed to provide clear, satisfying answers to all those questions. Believe me, I had many questions come up, and I had to research all these things over a period of about two years.

It was driven by necessity. My whole life fell apart because of lack of integrity, and lack of knowledge of leadership and so on. So I had to look into these things very deeply to salvage my own sanity. Believe me, I had to research down to the bedrock, what is wrong with our lives. And the fact is, without integrity our lives just **don’t work**.

So the intention of this **Being Integrity** is not to give you a bunch of rules to follow, and then you can say, “Well, I have integrity.” That would be artificial, that would be phony: an **act**. A lot of people are doing this act right now, especially in the business world, saying, “Well I have integrity,” you know? It’s just a false front, because they’re cheating. They’re working for corporations, and corporations are **fabrications**. Their whole personality is simply a fabrication. And that’s one of the things that the Buddha teaches us.

So what we **really** want to achieve is **Being Integrity**—to have the **being** of integrity, to have the being of an **honest man**. That’s why the Buddha calls it _sappurisā_—_sat_ meaning honest and _purisā_ meaning human being—a human being in the full sense of the term. So that you don’t have to **act** like you have integrity; in fact you don’t even have to **have** integrity, because you **are** integrity; you have the **being** of integrity, and so integrity manifests **spontaneously** in everything that you **do**, in everything that you **are**.

You don’t have to **think** about it, you don’t have to follow **rules**, you don’t have to look up case studies or examples of how to behave with integrity—you simply automatically behave with integrity because you have the **being** of integrity. So how do you change your being into the being of integrity? That’s what we’re going to cover in this series.

So integrity, the **being** of integrity, is **authentic** being, **honest** being, **sincere** from the core, from the heart being. And who you are when you are being with integrity is **your authentic self**. This is an **enhanced** state of being over the typical being that most people have, where they’re trying to follow something outside of themselves: some set of moral rules or something like that.

Now you might say, “Well, there’s so many rules in Buddhism, what is that?” The rules in Buddhism are simply a way of **measuring** a person’s integrity, because we have found through long experience that if a person has integrity, if a person is **being** with integrity, they will automatically follow these rules. Because they will no longer cause harm or suffering to themselves or others.

The rules prohibit activities that cause bad _kamma_. So if you’re a person of integrity, you’re going to want to only do good _kamma,_ and not cause suffering. So you’re going to avoid those activities automatically. You don’t even have to think about it. It doesn’t become a rule for you, it becomes simply the **way you are**: your **being**. Actually it’s a **context**—a certain context. And we’re going to show you exactly how to **create** that context in this series.

Now our experience of life—human life on planet Earth—is usually that our life is broken. It’s broken in so many ways. Like for example, broken promises, broken dreams, broken hopes and aspirations, broken plans. How many times have you planned to do something with somebody and then they break their promise. They don’t show up, or they don’t do what they said they were going to do, or they don’t do it on time, or they don’t do it in the **way** that you expected them to do—and so on and so forth.

These are all **breakdowns**, these are failures: failures of **integrity**. And in our own life, how many times have we said, promised **ourselves** we’re going to **do** something, or we’re going to **be** a certain way, and that we didn’t do it? Alright. Well, I love that saying by Yoda, “There is no **try**: **do** or **not do**.” So every time you hear somebody saying, “Well, I’ll **try**…” No. That means you’re not going to do it; that means you’re not making a commitment from your **being** to **be** or **do** that thing in the way that you’re **expected** to do.

So unless a person has integrity, they’re going to try to get away with saying, “Well, I’ll try. Well I’ll, you know, try my best…” No! That’s nonsense! That’s not integrity; that’s trying to **act** like you have integrity just to please other people. But the truth will come out. So either you **have** integrity or you **don’t** have; either you **are** integrity or you’re **not** integrity.

The idea is to **be** integrity, so that your integrity is **spontaneous**. You don’t have to **think** about it, you don’t have to follow a bunch of rules in some book; you just **are** integrity and you **behave** with integrity **by nature**, spontaneously, effortlessly. That’s real integrity.

There’s also a lot of integrity issues around **leadership**. In leadership—well, there’s many different forms of leadership—but the leadership we’re talking about is the leadership, the **quality** of leadership, that makes people **automatically** want to follow. That makes people automatically enthusiastic to **participate** in whatever initiative the leader is proposing.

And so, the quality of a leader that is based on **integrity** is irresistible. People **love** a leader who has integrity, because they tell the **truth**. They actually keep their promises: they actually do what they said they were going to do, when they said they were going to do it. This is integrity—or, this is a way of **measuring** integrity. There are other measures of integrity, and we’re going to go deep into that subject in the seminar.

What makes a person have integrity? First of all they **decide**. They make the determination within themselves, “I’m going to have integrity.” And then they **adjust their being** until they actually are **being** with integrity. And the way you do that is by creating a context, and we’ll show you exactly how to do this in the series.

Now why is integrity so important? Why is integrity such a **vital** part of being human? To the extent that if you don’t have integrity, or if you don’t act with integrity, or if you’re not being with integrity, that you can’t be said to be a human being in the full sense of the term.

Well, another way of measuring integrity is by the reduction or elimination of **suffering**. A person with integrity, a person who is **being** with integrity, does not cause suffering, either for themselves or others. And if they do, they immediately **correct** it and make up the damage. That is the **nature** of a person of integrity. So a person of integrity—a _sappurisā_ in the Buddha’s language—is going to be a person whose life is **committed** to the eradication of suffering for themselves and others. And everything they do is going to be aimed at reducing or eliminating suffering in their own lives and in the lives of people around them.

So in essence, being with integrity is an **intention**: a **specific** intention to reduce or eliminate **suffering**. And that leads us to the definition of integrity that we’re going to use in our seminar.

Let me lead into this subject by reading some of the things that Buddha said about integrity.

“A person of integrity would know of [another] person of integrity: ‘This is a person of **integrity**.’ A person of integrity is endowed with **qualities** of integrity; he is a person of integrity in his **friendship**, in the way he **wills**, the way he gives **advice**, the way he **speaks**, the way he **acts**, the **views** he holds and the way in which he gives a **gift**.

“And **how** is a person of integrity endowed with qualities of integrity? There is the case where a person of integrity is endowed with conviction, conscience, concern; he is learned, with aroused persistence, unmuddled mindfulness and good discernment. This is how a **person** of integrity is endowed with **qualities** of integrity.” — [Cūḷa-puṇṇama Sutta](https://www.accesstoinsight.org/ati/tipitaka/mn/mn.110.than.html) (MN 110)

So we’re going to analyze these statements by the Buddha, and we’re going to go into each of these qualities that he mentions, and define them very scientifically and completely, and answer any questions that you might have about what is the definition of a person of integrity.

## Episode 1—Definitions

**Video link:** [YouTube](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2ybCezcoLao&list=PL8s1kPtHmCZI5gpsQHBcob3EXsFwcO7Si&index=2&t=8s)

_Āya Bhuwan:_ Welcome to the next installment of **Being Integrity**, where we’re going to talk about the definition of **integrity** used in this series, and also discuss the cultural limitations or assumptions that cause most people to misunderstand, not only integrity, but the entire teaching of the Buddha.

Buddha spoke on integrity often. It was a favorite theme of his. He used the word _sappurisā_, which means _sat_ or a truthful _purisā,_ man or person. So a _sappurisā_ is one who speaks the truth.

In our modern society there are so many excuses for lying, or fudging the truth, or telling little white lies. But they’re not really white because we deceive ourselves, as well as others. And once we get in that habit it’s very difficult to break. So part of integrity is being truthful; but there’s a lot more to it than that.

The dictionary definition of integrity is not very useful for our purposes. Let’s go over it though, just so we have a baseline for comparison. **Integrity** is defined as a noun, “the quality of being **honest** and having **strong moral principles**; moral uprightness,” and the example is: ‘He is known as a man of integrity’. The second definition given is “the state of being **whole** and **undivided**,” and the example is: ‘upholding territorial integrity and national sovereignty.’ Third is, “the condition of being **unified, unimpaired** or **sound** in construction,” for example: ‘the structural integrity of the novel.’ And finally, “**internal consistency** or a **lack of corruption**, \[as in electronic data\]: ‘integrity checking’.”

Well, this definition is OK; but until only about 20 or 25 years ago the **second** definition—wholeness or completeness—was actually the **primary** definition of integrity in the English language. Why did it change? Well, language changes as society changes, and the rise of fundamentalist religions has contributed to reinterpreting the word integrity, instead of meaning wholeness, to mean ‘following some moral standard.’

Now what is the problem with this? **Whose** moral standard, **which** moral standard? and when? Morality is a relative thing; it’s **external** to the personality. So if we’re following some moral code it means it’s **imposed** on us from **outside**, number one; and number two, morality **changes** over time—it’s **relative**. So the morality of New York in the 1920s, is completely different from the morality in a Buddhist monastery in Sri Lanka in the 17th century. **Which** morality are we talking about?

And it’s unfair to make an assumption and say that we accept **this** morality or **that** morality as **the** morality, when actually there are so many contradictions in different moral teachings that it’s basically a useless standard. A much **better** standard is **completeness, consistency, wholeness**, **fully functional**.

Let’s look a little bit into the etymological derivation of the word **integrity**. Integrity is from Latin, _integritatum, integritas:_ soundness, wholeness, **blamelessness**—I really like that one, blamelessness—from _integer,_ whole. For example we call a **whole number** an **integer**.

So I really like the definition of **blamelessness**, because being without blame means that one does not harm others: no one can blame him; no one can say, “He hurt me, he injured me, he harmed me,” and “He hurt my feelings,” or whatever. A person who has integrity does not cause suffering. This is the **key**: the sense of **wholeness**, in **perfect condition** is from about the mid-15th century [from [Online Etymology Dictionary](https://www.etymonline.com/search?q=integrity)], and as an outgrowth of theological commentaries on the Bible, and so on like that.

Now all this taken together leads to a very interesting, powerful **functional** definition of **integrity** as “**a state of being leading to reducing or eliminating suffering for oneself and others**.”

A person of integrity does not cause suffering, either to himself or others. And suffering is defined by the Buddha as “any kind of pain, any kind of inconvenience, any kind of anxiety.” So a person of integrity does not cause anxiety or pain, either to himself or others. That means he doesn’t do anything that has a bad _kārmik_ result; he does not participate in the causes of suffering. And that has extensive implications as far as the **process of becoming** which is given in _paṭicca-samuppāda_ or Dependent Origination. And we’re going to go deep into this teaching in this series, and show how suffering develops from our intentions.

Basically, as soon as we have a selfish intention it creates suffering, both for ourselves and for others. So the suffering is a result of _kamma,_ which is a result of our intentions. Our intentions or our desires have to be pure; they have to be based on reducing or eliminating suffering for ourselves and others. To go on: “**Defining integrity in terms of reducing suffering also allows us to render it as an objective state, which is measurable by the external activities it inspires**.”

In other words, a person of integrity is not going to cause anything that injures others. We can **measure** this, because it’s very easy to set up a system of values that eliminates all possibility of harming others; and the Buddha has done this. _Vinaya_ is a set of laws, principles or precepts followed by Buddhist monks. Laymen, or people getting ready to become monks, follow five or eight or ten of these principles. But fully ordained monks follow 227 principles.

And yet these are not rules—that’s why we don’t call them _rules_, we call them _precepts_. They are ways of **measuring integrity**. If a person’s intention is properly aligned with the intention of the Buddha to eliminate suffering, then he will automatically not transgress any of the precepts. In fact, 227 precepts isn’t even enough to describe everything. But the point is with our **intention**. If our intention is to reduce or eliminate suffering, then we automatically will avoid activities that cause pain to ourselves and others. So if we observe ourselves carefully, we can see what these are—and begin to reduce the causes of suffering.

> “**An essential factor in our definition of integrity is that the activities undertaken to reduce or eliminate suffering must not generate additional suffering as a byproduct**.”

Let me give you an example: a fundamentalist religion which says, “You just **believe** in this religion, and **after you die** you’re going to go to heaven; and you’ll be with God, and there won’t be any suffering.” Well what’s wrong with this picture? Well number one, it’s a post-dated check: “You believe **now**, you follow the rules **now**, and in the future you get the result—in the next life or after you die.” This is called a ‘post-dated check’. If I’m going to buy your car, would you take a check from me dated one month from now? Then if you’re going to select a spiritual or religious path, then why would you accept one that only gives you benefits **after you die**? Well what about **now**?

So the Buddha’s teaching is not like that. In the Buddha’s teaching, as soon as we begin to follow the principles, as soon as we understand the method by which the teaching works, we **immediately** experience a **tangible** reduction in suffering. I experienced this myself last year, when I began to practice Buddhism seriously. As soon as I began to seriously practice the principles, the precepts and the meditation, I experienced a **tremendous** reduction in suffering, and that continues to the present day. And the more advanced I become in understanding and following the Buddha’s method, the more that reduction in suffering continues and increases. So the Buddha's method gives a **tangible experience** of reduced suffering in the present, **here and now**. No post-dated check.

Second, religion requires us to **believe** in something that we cannot verify with our senses or mind. We have to have **faith**. The Buddha’s teaching does not demand faith; well, maybe a **little** faith, just enough to go into the laboratory and try the experiment. And each of us **has** the laboratory required to perform the experiment that verifies the Buddha’s teaching. That is, our own minds and hearts.

So if we go into our own minds and hearts, and observe according to the Buddha’s instructions, we’ll see the same things going on that he described. And if we perform the activities of cooling down the senses and so on that the Buddha gives, then we’ll automatically experience the result. Just like when you go into the lab in chemistry or physics class, and you actually investigate the principles you’ve been taught, you’ll see that they work. It’s the same thing; it doesn’t require a whole lot of faith, just enough faith to **try the experiment**.

The third thing that’s different between the Buddha’s teaching and the religion, is: religion requires you to obey an external authority; whereas the Buddha’s teaching does not require an external authority—you simply try the process given by the Buddha in his teachings, experience the result, and that’s it. You have **no** obligation, you don’t have to pay a monthly **tithe**, you don’t have to belong to any **organization**, you don’t have to follow a particular **teacher**, you don’t become **dependent** on or **obligated** to anything outside **yourself**.

Of course if you have integrity, then you’re going to act in such a way that other people’s suffering will **also** be reduced; and there will be some external interaction due to the process. But it’s strictly on your **own terms**; you don’t become obligated to some external organization, unless you choose to cooperate with others, as I have by becoming a monk. But still, the objective becomes to reduce or eliminate suffering, both for oneself and others.

This leads to a very interesting definition of integrity. Thus in this series we define integrity as:

> **“The objective, measurable state or condition of being whole, complete, unbroken, unimpaired, sound, in perfect condition—born of compassion: the intention to eliminate suffering for self and others without creating dependence.”**

Compassion means that we see the suffering that, both for ourselves and others, that human life makes happen to us. And then we also go deeper into it—we see the **cause** of suffering, we see the process of Dependent Origination, the process of **becoming**, and how that works. Then we go further than that, we start to create **intentions** to reduce or eliminate suffering, both for ourselves and others. And finally, we actually get on that path, and we walk that path until we get the result.

So these are the Four Noble Truths discovered by the Buddha: one is that **life is suffering**: existence and suffering go hand-in-hand. **Birth** is suffering, **life** is suffering, old age, disease, death—so many other things in our lives cause suffering. And the second is the **cause of suffering**: the Buddha gives detailed knowledge of the **process of becoming**. He calls it _paṭicca-samuppāda_ or Dependent Origination: how the process of becoming begins from desire, and proceeds through a series of interrelated causes and effects, actually winding up in our **being** the way we are. This is the second thing, the **cause** of suffering.

The third noble truth is the **cessation of suffering**. Cessation of suffering is possible; it’s not outside the realm of possibility, it can be done. And finally fourth, the Noble Eightfold Path, or the path to the cessation of suffering, which is _Nibbāna._ So these four truths—**suffering**, the **cause** of suffering, the **cessation** of suffering and the **path** to the cessation of suffering—are actually the essence of being a **person of integrity**.

Now actually, **everybody** knows that there’s suffering in life. Even little children are very well aware of it. But nobody knows the actual cause. And we can be certain of this, because if we **knew** the cause, we could **stop** it. Yet after thousands of years, none of the plans that people have come up with have stopped suffering—have actually resulted in the cessation of suffering—except the Buddha’s teaching.

For example, let’s take **government**. A government is originally a plan to **prevent**, or at least **reduce** suffering. But actually government results in more suffering than anything! Look at all the wars; look at all the unnecessary nonsense involved in politics. All of this is suffering. We use **punishment** to try to prevent people from causing harm to others. And we’ve been **using** punishment for thousands of years. We’ve been using government and politics for **thousands** of years. We’ve been using policies and religions and morality for **thousands** of years. And **none** of it has worked! None of it has stopped people from doing bad things that cause suffering to others.

The only thing that has worked is the Buddha's teaching. Anyone who follows the Buddha’s teaching becomes harmless, becomes blameless, becomes a person of integrity, a _sappurisā_. A _sappurisā_ is one who is on the Eightfold Path. A person of integrity is one who has formed the intention to reduce or eliminate suffering, both for himself and others. A person on the Eightfold Path is cognizant of the Four Noble Truths, and **this** is the definition of a human being in the full sense of the term. A person of integrity is one who understands that life is suffering; therefore one should be kind. He understands the **cause** of suffering, therefore one should act to rein in **desire** which is the cause of suffering. A person who has integrity realizes that the aim of life is **cessation** of suffering, and that it’s **possible**. And finally, he should be willing to do whatever it takes to **walk the path** to bring this about. This is a real person of integrity.

## Episode 2—Preliminaries

**Video link:** [YouTube](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CAyJxOqrPqQ&list=PL8s1kPtHmCZI5gpsQHBcob3EXsFwcO7Si&index=3)

_Āya Bhuwan:_ may you live long!

Welcome to episode two of **Being Integrity**, where we establish a firm foundation for your progress in this series. **Why** is integrity so difficult? Sometimes when we try to explain it to people, it’s as if we’re speaking a **foreign language**. But actually, integrity has been **trained** out of us; it has been **socialized** out of us; it has been basically **beaten** out of us by a society surrounding us that’s completely out-of-integrity itself.

The government is spying on everybody, they’re lying to the press, to the Congress; businesses are stabbing each other in the back; there’s all kinds of covert wars and stuff going on all over the planet—and these are the **leaders**! So if the leaders are like that, then imagine what the rest of the population must be. In school, it’s supposed to be about education; but it’s actually just about **social conditioning**, about training easy-to-manage workers for the industrial corporations.

So we’re not really getting what we’re promised in any area of life: **government** is corrupt, **business** is corrupt, **school** is corrupt, **families** are corrupt; people are **cheating** on each other, nobody’s following any kind of moral standards. It’s very rare, and when they **do**, it’s only because of **external coercion** like a church, or because they’re afraid of getting **caught**.

So we live in a world where being out-of-integrity is **pervasive**, and to **get along** in that world we often find ourselves **compromising** what we **know** is right and wrong, in order to get by. It’s a pretty sad state of affairs. But this is the typical consciousness that we find in the world today. We want to **do** something about this; we want to **encourage** and **help** people to **regain** their integrity, and to become a **fully integrated, whole, fully functional human being**.

Why? Because without integrity, without the **intention** to reduce suffering or eliminate suffering for ourselves **and** others, we are less than fully human. A full human being—human being in the full sense of the term—is one who is committed to **reducing** or **eliminating** suffering for **everyone**. Of course, this is a Buddha, or at least an _arahant:_ a fully Self-realized person.

So a full human being is something very far **above** the average human being of today. Yet **without** integrity, we cannot even take a small step toward that platform. We’re stuck in the **subhuman** consciousness of thinking we are the body; we’re thinking we are some abstract designation related to our social or economic or political status. That is a **conditioned** state of consciousness. It’s not **real** consciousness; it’s consciousness in terms of some **symbolic representation** or some **abstract relationship** that we take on and say, “This is my self.”

We’re going to get into this, or actually we have already gone into a deep analysis of how we construct the false ego in our [Cup of Tea](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PL8s1kPtHmCZKF70TBItSZS4auuEUCbaTo) series, so we’re not going to repeat all that here. But what we are going to say is that you should **develop better integrity**. Everything about your life will improve if you do. So this is our message in this series, that “Please improve, increase, enhance and develop your integrity, and you will be very pleasantly surprised at how much your life will improve.”

Now there are a few things you need to know before we begin the actual training part of this series. And the first thing is that this is not ordinary education; this is not a regular online course. This is what we call **ontological education**. It’s not regular education, and it’s not training. Nobody’s going to stand over you and make sure that you do what’s in the lessons. You have to be responsible **yourself**; you have to take the initiative **yourself** to develop your integrity to a higher degree.

And furthermore, we are talking about a subject that is rarely examined in Western society, and that is, **being**. People talk about having and doing and knowing and thinking, but they don’t really talk about **being**. So we’re going to have to introduce a whole new language, a whole **network** of technical terminology about **being**. That is so that we can describe the subject matter of this course, which is **being**: **how** you are being, and **what** you are being. And that’s why it’s called **Being Integrity**.

So there are a few **prerequisites**, and we’ll cover those in the next slide. But for right now I want you to know this is **ontological education**—it’s about **being**. And when we cover a point, you should take that information and **think** about it. **Contemplate** it, review it in your mind, reflect upon it, and look into your own life, your own experience, and see if you can find it, or evidence for it, in your own experience. This is called **phenomenological self-analysis**, and it’s a very important part of our training.

In fact, without it the training doesn’t work. You have to do the work; nobody can do it for you. No matter how clever a presenter I am—which is not very, really—but as far as I can I’ll give you the information. You have to **do** something with it: you have to sit down and do the work. You have to do the contemplation. Turn off the phone, lock the door, tell everybody not to bug you for a while. Sit down and **contemplate** this material; look into **yourself** and try to understand **how** this reflects in your own experience.

You have to be ready to **examine** your **assumptions** about life. Your assumptions about life are the things that you **assume** to be true without really having any proof. The prime example is the existence of “I”, the self, the ego. We assume that we have a permanent self, or actually an eternal self—the **soul**. In western language, in Western culture, religion and philosophy the existence of the soul is taken for granted.

But can you show me your soul, or anybody’s soul? Can you show me **my** soul? Can you actually observe the soul? Can you prove the existence of the soul? No, of course not. That’s because the soul is an imaginary entity: the self, the ego, the “I”, the personality, the person is an imaginary thing we constructed in our own minds out of our sense impressions. And we’ve already covered how we do that in great detail in the video on the [Mūla-pariyāya Sutta](https://youtu.be/-Bn4_6x-GHw), the root sequence. And so we’re not going to go into that in detail right now, but we’re going to refer you to that video.

Now what I want you to think about, and what I want you to take a look at is to be **open** to examining your assumptions. Just be **ready**, if anything we say clashes with your **beliefs** about life, to take a **look** at it and see, “Well, is that really so? Can I **know** this, can I **prove** this? Or am I merely **assuming** it?” as in the case of the self, the “I”?

The Buddha says, **_anicca dukkha anāttā_**. These are the three characteristics of reality. _Anicca_ means impermanent, _dukkha_ means suffering, and _anāttā_ means no-self. The Buddha says, “There is no self or anything related to a self.” In other words, no possessions either. These are all **illusory**, these are simply **designations**, they’re simply **labels** that we **concoct** out of words. They don’t have any real existence.

Just like a **corporation**: I was making the example, a bunch of people get together and put some words on paper and get some other people to sign it, and **boom** they have a corporation. Where is that corporation exactly? Can you **show** it to me, can you prove its existence? “Well, it says right here on this sheet of paper…” No, those are just words on paper. There is no corporation; there is no such thing as a **country**, there is no such thing as a **club**, a **group**, a **class** of people. These are all simply **labels**, they’re all simply words. And we **act as if** they are real, but they’re actually only **assumptions**.

So in this course, one of the things we have to do is take a **really good close look** at our assumptions about life: what we **assume** to be true, or what we take for **granted** about life that is actually just a **label**, just **words**, just a **description** of what we would **like** to be true, instead of what really **is**.

So this is **ontological education**. Now to get the most out of this series you really should review our previous series in the **Skillful Living** series. There are four of them: **Skillful Living 1** is the [Foundation Series](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PL8s1kPtHmCZKmgES4E6Lnrqu9Sdt4_786), and that deals with **our** assumptions, **our** background knowledge and the truths that **we** accept as true, before going into **any** of the other subjects that we cover in any other series, including this one. So you should **definitely** review the _Foundation Series_. I’ll give a live link on the YouTube version of this, otherwise you have to go look it up.

The second one is [Becoming Genius](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PL8s1kPtHmCZKSDrnl37T9M163BHPUSOr5) (aka _Matrix Learning_). Now _Becoming Genius_ is based on my own experience of **how to learn**. First we have to **learn how to learn**. If you try to go through this series without having assimilated the learning technology that we give in _Becoming Genius_, you won’t get much out of it. You won’t know how to look up your **misunderstood terms**; you won’t know how to **model** the systems that we’re giving; you won’t understand what an **ontological model** is; you won’t understand what a **terministic screen** is; and so on and so forth.

We’re going to **assume** in this series that you **know** these things. So you better review that material, otherwise you’re going to be **lost**. Because we’re using a lot of terminology out of that series to **speed up** the learning process.

Number three is [Being in the World](http://www.apple.com). _Being in the World_ is an **ontological analysis of ordinary life**. We’re going to take a lot of the conclusions from _Being in the World_ as **assumptions** in this series. We go through everything in **detail** in _Being in the World_ and the accompanying study series, that **analyze** and ask **questions** for you to think about. So until you’ve gone through that material—at least have acquaintance with it, if not a deep realization of it—a lot of what’s in **this** series is going to seem really far out, and it’s going to contradict your sense of who you are, what you are, what you’re doing here.

The Buddha’s teaching is not like any other field of knowledge in existence. It’s completely unique and special. So because this series is based on the Buddha's teaching, we take as **given** many things that are **counterintuitive** for the average Western person, the average english-speaking person. So you really should review _Being in the World_ to get a handle on our background assumptions.

And finally, [Call of the Friend](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PL8s1kPtHmCZLRgENn9pPgjPhORkY_7GVQ). _Call of the Friend_ is a series about what happens when you get the opportunity to investigate and experience **transcendental wisdom**. That’s what the teaching of the Buddha is: transcendental wisdom, beyond all other systems of knowledge, beyond oneness, beyond nothingness, beyond everything that’s ever existed before on this planet Earth. And that’s why I became a **monk**, because the Buddha’s teaching is just **beyond everything**.

So the **insights** from that teaching are something that most people never get a chance to come in contact with. This series, and our other work, gives you an opportunity to really hang out with the Buddha’s teaching in a different way—not in a formal or religious setting, but simply going over the questions of life, and profiling the **value** of the opportunity to hang out with somebody who actually knows these things, and has realized some of them. So please go through these four **Skillful Living** series: the [Foundation Series](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PL8s1kPtHmCZKmgES4E6Lnrqu9Sdt4_786)**_,_** [Becoming Genius](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PL8s1kPtHmCZKSDrnl37T9M163BHPUSOr5)**_,_** [Being in the World](http://www.apple.com) and [Call of the Friend](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PL8s1kPtHmCZLRgENn9pPgjPhORkY_7GVQ)_._

We considered these prerequisites to this series, and we’re going to be **building** on a lot of the ideas that are presented in **detail** in those prior series. So do yourself a favor: If you want to get the **maximum value** from _Being Integrity_, then go through the previous series.

Now besides the background material, there are **four important principles** that you need to keep in mind when viewing this series. And the first one is to **show up fully present**. In other words, when you watch this video, don’t have any distractions; don’t let anything interrupt you; turn off your phone, turn off the beeper, lock your door, make sure you’re not going to be disturbed; and concentrate on **the experience of watching**. Because you need to be **fully present**, and have your **full attention** focused on the video in order to **get** this material; it’s **very deep**. You have to **participate with integrity**, and integrity means **wholeness**, fullness. So that means you need to have your whole self **available** to this material, to **confront** the meaning and to reflect on it, and see **how it** **shows up** in your experience.

You also need to **be yourself authentically**. In other words, don’t think, “Well, what are my friends gonna think if I start talking about this integrity stuff?” Hey, your friends don’t need to know anything about it. Your friends are going to be surprised very pleasantly if you get anything out of this, and you change and improve your integrity. So they’ll be pleased; but just leave them out of it for now. **You participate** in this experience, **being authentically yourself**—what **you** really think and who **you** really are. That’s what will do **you** the most good.

Now, another thing is, you have to **look up** and **clear** your **misunderstood terms** as discussed in the _Becoming Genius_ series. This is **so** important, I wish I could stress properly **how** important this is. Well, how important is it? It’s like if your **hair was on fire**. OK? It’s **that** important. You know, if your hair was on fire, you would be pretty focused on putting it out, wouldn’t you? OK, so if you encounter a misunderstood term, you should be **that** concerned about getting it cleared up and properly understood. Well, what is a misunderstood term? Watch _Becoming Genius_, will you please? Watch _Becoming Genius_, especially the second one on [Duplication](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AaszxSWPFbQ&list=PL8s1kPtHmCZKSDrnl37T9M163BHPUSOr5&index=4), because that’s the one that covers looking up misunderstood terms.

You **have** to look up your misunderstood terms. I used a word a little while ago, **ontology**. Can you define ontology? If you can’t, you need to look it up. Oh that’s a **not-understood term**. A **misunderstood term** would be if I say, “Look it **up**.” What’s the definition of **up**? Ah, see? You can’t quote it, can you? You have to look it up in the dictionary, because that misunderstanding will build on previous misunderstandings that you have, especially from **school**, and it will cause you to be to **not be fully present** with your **full attention** and be able to absorb the material.

So I know this from experience, because I started looking up words in high school, and I went from a C student to an A student, and got **perfect scores** in my college board tests, OK? So if you look up your misunderstood words you will become **a lot smarter**, and that’s what we want.

Now further, it will really help if you are **committed** to **something greater** than **yourself**. In other words, you need to have a **reason** for living, a **cause**, a **purpose** greater than just ‘getting what I want’ or ‘being happy,’ or whatever small purpose is within the scope of your human life. You need to have something **bigger** than you that you’re **committed** to. Well, why is that? Because if you’re only committed to yourself that makes you **selfish**, by definition; and a selfish person **cannot** have integrity. Well, why is that? Because they don’t care about anybody else. And we have already defined integrity as **someone who’s committed to reducing or eliminating suffering both for themselves and others**. So you need to be committed to, and **care** enough about **others** that you want to reduce or eliminate suffering for them as well.

That’s another part of what it takes to be a **full human being**. So if you don’t have something **beyond yourself** that you’re fully committed to—for example, I’m fully committed to the _saṅgha_ of the Buddha; I’ve become a monk; I’ve taken refuge for life in the Buddha, the Dhamma and the _saṅgha._ So that’s being committed to something greater than yourself. I’m showing by example how you do that. But it doesn’t **have** to be becoming a monk, it could be your **family**, it could be your **business**, it could be something, a cause—anything that’s bigger than you. You need to be fully committed to that, **and** to share the benefits of what you learn here in that commitment as well, in that relationship. That will get you the **maximum** benefit from this course. Because you need to be **bigger** than just an ordinary human being.

Finally, you need to be **willing** to be **at cause** over **changing your being**. This is a **hugely important** point. We discussed this earlier, in the video on [Being and Becoming](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CV4vx49hPCA&list=PL8s1kPtHmCZKmgES4E6Lnrqu9Sdt4_786&index=2&t=4s) in the _Foundation Series_. That if you’re going to stop suffering—even for **yourself**, what to speak of anybody else—you have to **become** something different than what you are today. It’s like, are you suffering? “Yes.” So if you stay the same you’re going to continue to suffer, right? So you have to **change your being**, you have to **become something different** than what you are today to stop your suffering, and to also help others stop theirs.

See how logical it is? It’s totally logical. And not only that, life experience tells us that this is so. Because then why would we be interested in a better job, a better car, nicer clothes, a better relationship or so on and so forth, or improving in **any** area of life, if we’re not willing to **change our being**? The fact is, we have to **die** to who we are **today** to **become** the person we **want** to be **tomorrow**. This is just a fact of life. We have to be willing to **let go** of who we are now—the person that we **wound up being**, often by circumstance or by accident—and **become** the person we really **want to be**. For the future depends on our changing our being; both **our** future and the future of the people **around** us. So you be willing to be at cause over changing your being to get the full benefit of this series.

Let’s talk some more about terminology. Our _Being Integrity_ series uses a certain **technical terminology**. And **you might think**—and other people might even agree—that we **could** say things in a much simpler way. We could use terminology that’s a lot more down-to-earth or whatever. But this is actually not true. We’re trying to make certain distinctions between the **ordinary** way of being, and a **new** way of being that’s based on **complete integrity**. So in order to do that, we have to use certain terms; and we have to use those terms in a certain **way**.

Let me give you an example if I say the word **presenting**, what does it sound like; a show, right? “And now presenting _Rocky and Bullwinkle_…” or something like that. But what if I’m a doctor? If a doctor uses the word **presenting** he’s talking about the symptomology of a patient: “The patient was presenting warts,” for example, or sniffles or whatever the symptoms are. So when a doctor uses the word **presenting** he uses it in a **different** sense than someone who is talking about a television show. Why? Because the doctor has a **network of terminology** describing the states of the patient, which is **very** **useful** for his work. And sometimes this includes using ordinary words in a special way, or using **special** words that have no equivalent **outside** the field of medicine. If I say, for example, a **tracheotomy—**that has really no meaning outside of medicine. Now I could say, “We’re going to shove a tube down your throat,” but that wouldn’t really give the technical meaning, the same meaning that **tracheotomy** does.

So, what we’re talking about here is creating a **model of terms** that describe **how** a particular subject **works**. In the case of a doctor, for example, their terminology describes how **symptomology** and how different treatments **work**; how the human body and metabolism work. In the case of an airline pilot, their terms describe how **flying** works, how **airplanes** work, how air traffic control and navigation, and so on, work in the context of flying an airplane. Same with a musician, or even a plumber; they each have their **shop talk**; they each have their specific terminology used to describe their area of expertise and specialization.

So also in the science of **being**. We have a specific **network of terminology**, beginning with the word **ontology** and **ontics**. You should look these words up. Get **really clear** on them, and whenever we introduce a new term, we’ll describe it briefly. Maybe we’ll define it in detail if it’s required by the presentation. But it’s up to **you** to **look up these words** and to understand what we’re **doing** with them. We’re trying to build a **network**, a **model** that shows **how** the **process of being** works.

Now, the Buddha has already done this. He’s built a model which is called Dependent Origination—_paṭicca-samuppāda_—and we’re going to go into this model, and the building blocks of it, and the terminology and so forth, very very deeply in this series. Because it is the **working part** of **how we change our being**. We’re changing our being all the time anyway; but we’re changing it in a way that is **not** based on full knowledge of being and becoming. When we get that knowledge, **then** we see how we could use this thing in a much better way. If I have a car and a set of tools, and I take the tools and I start messing around on the car, it’s more likely I’m going to break something than fix it, if I don’t know what I’m doing. But if I’ve been to mechanic school, and I have all the manuals at hand, and I know exactly what I’m doing, then I can fix the car. Similarly, if you **know** the **process of being**, even though everyone is involved in this process already, if you have **deep knowledge** of it, you can use it so much more effectively, just like the trained mechanic can use those tools much more effectively than the weekend shade-tree mechanic.

## Episode 3—Discernment

**Video link:** [YouTube](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=14NW7DwjAwQ&list=PL8s1kPtHmCZI5gpsQHBcob3EXsFwcO7Si&index=4)

_Āya Bhuwan:_ may you live long!

Welcome to Episode 3 of _Being Integrity_, and today we’re going to **discern** or **recognize** integrity as compared to other types of knowledge that discuss right and wrong, such as morality, legality, ethics and so on.

Well, what does the Buddha say about integrity? He says:

“And how is a person of integrity endowed with qualities of integrity? There is the case where a person of integrity is endowed with conviction, conscience, concern; he is learned, with aroused persistence, **unmuddled mindfulness** and **good discernment**. This is **how** a person of integrity is endowed with qualities of integrity.” — [Cūḷa-puṇṇama Sutta](https://www.accesstoinsight.org/ati/tipitaka/mn/mn.110.than.html) (MN 110)

I love how the Buddha always tells us **how**; not just **what**, but **how**. So we’ll go into some of these other qualities later on in this series. But right now we want to talk about **unmuddled mindfulness** and **good discernment**.

So, to discern something means to be able to pick it out, to recognize it, to identify it even among a bunch of other similar things. So for example, if I had a pet dog, and there were a whole bunch of dogs running around, I’d be able to pick out my dog from among the pack. Similarly, there are many different ideas dealing with right and wrong, good and bad, what to do, what not to do. And we’re going to go over the **difference** between integrity and these other ideas.

We use a **positive** model of integrity; and the reason we do that is because it gives us **access** to **enhanced performance**. And we’ll get into that later on in the series. But basically, if you have integrity, you will be able to perform **far greater** than a typical person **without** integrity. And of course the same goes for groups, organizations and societies that have integrity built-in. They will have a much higher output, much greater creativity and so on than others who don’t have integrity.

In our model, we discern or recognize **four phenomena** dealing with right and wrong: **morality, ethics, legality** and **integrity**. So let’s go over those briefly. Philosophical discourse and common usage misdefine and confuse morality, ethics, legality and integrity. This causes people to misunderstand these four phenomena, so it is very difficult to apply them properly. Their integrity declines as a result.

So what **is** the difference between morality, ethics, legality and integrity? Can you tell me right off the top of your head? Probably not; and that’s a problem. It’s a problem because these words actually refer to **different** things; and unfortunately in the ordinary dictionary definitions, they are defined **in terms of one another**. So there’s a lot of **circular definitions** going on: morality is defined as ethics, ethics is defined as morality, and so on.

So in order to clear this all up we’re going to apply a special set of definitions to these terms in our series, that will keep them separate. In our model, we discern, distinguish and define morality, ethics and legality as instances of **normative** values or **virtues** about good and bad, right and wrong, or what should or should not be.

So a **normative virtue** is a **negative** thing. In other words, the cops don’t bother you until you **break** the law, and then they arrest you and throw you in jail, you see? Or the teacher doesn’t punish you until you **break** the rules, you see? It does not reward good behavior, it simply punishes bad behavior; and as I pointed out in an earlier series, punishment **does not work**.

How long have we as a human race been using punishment to try to correct people’s behavior? Thousands of years, maybe? tens of thousands of years? Has it worked? No. People still do destructive and self-destructive acts because they don’t know the difference between right and wrong. Hey wait a minute: that’s the definition of insanity, isn’t it? A person doesn’t know the difference between right and wrong, they don’t know the rules, they don’t know what’s good and bad.

That’s because they don’t have integrity. If they had integrity there would be no need for rules, because a person would **automatically avoid** any activity that was harmful. But because integrity is something not well understood, confused with other things like morality and legality, and also considered something outside the person, like following a moral code, which is simply a bunch of rules—that way people’s integrity declines. And that’s what we’ve seen. So anyway, after thousands of years of trying punishment to correct people’s behavior, isn’t it time for something new? Well, let’s look into this some more.

What is a normative virtue exactly? Well, the definition of **normative** is an adjective, “establishing, relating to, or deriving from a standard or norm, especially of behavior,” and the example given in the dictionary:

‘negative sanctions are used to enforce normative behavior.’ That’s **perfect**; it’s **exactly** what we’re talking about: either you follow the norms, which are a standard **outside** of your self, or you’ll be **punished**. **Enforced** is the word; you’ll be forced to follow the norms. If you don’t want to, too bad. So of course this is **terrible** for morale. People get **depressed** over this because they want to do X, and X isn’t allowed in whatever context they’re in. So this is the problem: **normative** rules are **external** to the person, and they’re also **negative** in intent.

Let’s go on: This term appeared in the late 19th century, from French _normatif,_ from Latin _norma,_ ‘carpenter’s square’. Back in the 50s and 60s we used to call someone who we felt was excessively moral a ‘square’: “So-and-so is a real square.” Because he’s following an external standard; he’s not **integrated**, he’s not **integral**, he doesn’t have **integrity**; he’s not **whole** and **complete** in himself; he follows some **external** rule. This is a **square**. Why is it square? Because when you follow something external, you can’t be fully **yourself**. Everybody knows this intuitively, but now we make it scientific.

And let’s look into the term **virtue**. Virtue is a noun, “behavior showing high moral standards; a morally good or desirable quality: ‘patience is a virtue’. It can also mean “a good or useful quality of a thing”; but here we’re talking about human beings, so virtue in this sense is something that’s **outside** the person. This means that in our modern context especially, it’s considered **optional**. “Well, it’s **nice** if you can tell the truth, but you know, if it gets in the way of **profits**, or social **popularity** or something like that, oh we’ll tell a little white lie.”

Well, there is no such thing as a white lie; all lies are wrong. The truth always comes out eventually and then you get caught, and the result is worse than before. But people get short-term benefit out of lying, so they still do it, even though they **know** it’s wrong—if they’re sane. And really, any life experience will tell you, you’re going to get caught. So why do it? And the answer is, people think that truthfulness is a **virtue**; it’s something **outside** ourselves that we can adopt if it’s **nice** or **convenient**, or if we have the **time**. But if we’re in a **pinch** where we have to get some **result**, we can **ditch** it. And that’s what people **do**: in the name of **expediency**, they give up **virtues** and just do whatever they **like**, whatever they think **needs to be done**.

This is the problem with **integrity**: if integrity is looked on as a **virtue**, then it’s **disposable**, it’s **dispensable**—something we can live **without**. And because it’s often more convenient to **circumvent** the rules of morality. That’s what people do.

Now, in our model integrity is discerned as an instance of **positive** values, devoid of normative content. Integrity is thus not about good or bad, right or wrong, or what should or should not be. We will not give you a set of **rules**. Yes, there is a set of rules in the Buddha’s teaching: it’s called the _vinaya_. But **functionally** speaking, the **purpose** of the _vinaya_ is not to **enforce** a certain standard of behavior, but to **measure** a person’s integrity.

If you start to look at it like that, then it becomes a whole different story. Because integrity is something that you **are**. It’s in your **being**. It’s a **quality**; it’s not something that you **possess**, or **have**, or **do**. Not something **outside** yourself, it’s something **within** you. It’s part of your **nature**. And in that way, you **spontaneously** follow the rules of morality, because you just don’t **do** things that are **harmful**; you don’t do things that are **hurtful**, because you understand _kamma_ is going to give you back the pain that you create.

Let’s go on: Furthermore, the four **phenomena** of morality, ethics, legality and integrity are distinguished as belonging to distinct **domains**. Thus the definition of each term becomes clear, unambiguous and **discrete**. Discrete means separate, in this case. So what we’re doing here is creating a model of the different systems or ways of thinking that people have used to try to regulate their behavior, to **minimize the** **harm** that people do to one another.

And of course the problem is that no set of rules can cover all circumstances; no set of rules is appropriate to different times, places, societies, languages, religions and so on. So therefore, you have all these different conflicting sets of rules. Which one do I follow? It’s very hard to figure out. So what we’re doing is we’re saying each of these terms—**morality, ethics, legality** and **integrity**—belongs to a different **domain**—a different **context**, a different set of circumstances. And now we’re going to define which one is which.

First let’s look into the definition of **positive**. We say that integrity is a **positive** feature; a **positive** quality, not a **negative** quality like normative virtues. But what do we mean by positive? Well, the dictionary defines positive as an adjective, “consisting in, or characterized by, the **presence** or **possession** of features or qualities rather than their absence; indicating the **presence** of something; **constructive** in intention or attitude; showing **optimism** and **confidence**; showing **pleasing progress**, gain or improvement.”

In philosophy, positive means “dealing only with matters of fact and experience; not speculative or theoretical.” Fact and experiences are **positive**, and speculation and theory is **negative**. Why? Because it’s not based on **experience**. It’s a nice **idea**, it’s a great **theory**, but does it really work in **practice**? Usually **not**.

So a **positive** theory of human behavior is one that looks for the **good** qualities. It’s **optimistic**; it assumes that people are basically **good** and **want** to do the right thing, they just don’t know which set of rules to apply in a particular situation. It’s very confusing; so we get **rid** of the rules. We use the rules only to **measure** a person’s integrity **after the fact**. But to actually determine what to **do**, we use an entirely **different** set of criteria, a **positive** set of criteria based on experience: **what diminishes or eliminates suffering**?

For example the Buddha, when he created the _vinaya—_which are the 227 precepts followed by Buddhist monks—he didn’t just make these things up and say, “Well, this is a great **theory**, let’s follow these rules.” No. What happened was he observed the behavior of the monks, and anytime someone did something that caused **suffering**, he would make a rule about it. In other words, the _vinaya_ is not based on theory or speculation, it’s based on **experience**: “So-and-so did this, and it caused **suffering**, so let’s stop doing that.” You see the difference? It’s not just based on theology or philosophy or logic, it’s based on actual experience. That makes all the difference in the world.

So our model of integrity is based on a distinction between **normative values**—virtues, which are basically **negative**, speculative and theoretical in nature—and positive values, which are **optimistic** and are based on **experience**. And then we make a distinction between different **domains**. For example, in the **social virtue** domain we have **morality**. In the **group virtue** domain we have **ethics**, and in the **legal virtue** domain we have **legality**.

Now all these virtues are **external** to the person himself. They’re external sets of rules, and thus they cause **confusion** about which one to apply in a certain situation. Morality might dictate that we do one thing, ethics another, and legality something completely different. So it’s really **confusing**. But in the domain of **positive** values we have the **objective** domain. The objective domain is based on **experience**. It’s based on **reality** and sense perception. And that gives us **integrity**, which we define as “**the state or condition of being whole, complete, unbroken, fully functional, sound etc. and based on compassion: the intention to eliminate suffering without dependence**.”

This **distinguishes** integrity from all other forms of social and behavioral values.

Now let’s look into the definitions of some of these other things—morality, ethics and so on—and see **how** they differ from our conception of integrity. Let’s start by defining **morality**. Morality is a noun, “the principles concerning the distinction between right and wrong, or good and bad behavior.” Well, that’s nice; but **whose** morality? Morality is a relative term. Morality in New York in the 1920s is completely different from morality in a Buddhist monastery. Morality in California in the 1960s is completely different from Chinese morality. So the question is, which morality are we going to follow? Do we follow the morality that is given by religion? Do we follow the morality given by our corporation? You see, it’s a problem. “A particular system of values and principles of conduct, especially one held by a specified person or society; for example, ‘the bourgeois morality’.” Another definition: “the **extent** to which an action is right or wrong: ‘behind all arguments lies the issue of the morality of the possession of nuclear weapons’.”

So what is right? What is wrong? Who decides? If it doesn’t come down to the **individual**, then you have an **external** set of values. And this is always going to reduce **productivity**, reduce **energy**, reduce **creativity**. We’ll see how this works later on in the series, but I want to introduce this now, so that it’s really clear.

Let’s go on. Definition of ethics: noun, “moral principles that govern a person’s or group’s behavior: ‘judeo-christian ethics’; the moral correctness of specified conduct: ‘the ethics of euthanasia’.” So you see how these terms are cross-defined they’re defined in terms of **one another**. So unless you bring in the idea of a **domain**, and say that **morality** applies to the **social** domain; **ethics** applies to the **organizational** domain; you’re going to get confusion.

So **morality** is a system of right and wrong dictated by a **society**, whereas **ethics** is dictated by an **organization**. That means you can have a **social** idea of right and wrong, such as, “I never lie,” and then your **organization** can override that because, well, you work in the marketing department, and marketing is **nothing but** lies. So if you want to keep your job, you break your **morality** to keep your **ethics**. Or let’s put it this way: different organizations may be in competition with one another, so it’s **OK**, or it’s **ethical** to benefit **my** organization while attacking **another** organization of the same type. That’s group ethics; it’s relative. Just like **morality** is relative to **society**, **ethics** is relative to an **organization**. That distinguishes morality from ethics, but it **still** doesn’t solve the problem of **which** ethics or **which** morality we’re going to observe.

And now the definition of **legality**. Legality is a noun, “the quality or state of being in accordance with the law: ‘documentation testifying to the legality of the arms sale’; or obligation imposed by law.’ So then, the question again is, **which** law? If I’m in France, do I follow French law or American law? The problem is, the law can change in a heartbeat; all it takes is the administrative head or legislature voting to change the law, and that’s it. What was legal yesterday is now illegal today, or vice versa. Tomorrow the whole thing can change again.

So **legality, morality** and **ethics** are all **external**, and they cause **confusion** because they’re **relative** and **changeable**. What’s legal or moral today can change tomorrow. It just depends on the fashion, or the overriding consensus of the society, the rules of the particular organization, or the laws enacted by the government.

Let’s take a look again at the dictionary definition of **integrity**. Integrity is a noun, “The quality of being honest and having strong moral principles; moral uprightness: ‘He is known to be a man of integrity’.” 2—“The state of being whole and undivided: ‘upholding territorial integrity and national sovereignty’.” 3—“The condition of being unified. unimpaired or sound in construction: ‘the structural integrity of the novel’.” And 4—“Internal consistency or lack of corruption \[as in electronic data\]: ‘integrity checking’.”

So let’s look at **our** definition of integrity. Our definition of integrity is based on the **functional** definition, that “**Integrity is a state of being leading to reducing or eliminating suffering for self and others**.” This is **positive**; this is **functional**; this is based on **experience**. If you have integrity, you’re going to be suffering **less** than others who **don’t** have integrity. It’s **experiential**: you can experience it for yourself. If I tell the truth, and I always tell the truth, and I can be **counted on** for telling the truth, then I will live a better quality of existence than someone who lies. In our series _Being Integrity_ we define integrity as:

> “**The objective, measurable state or condition of being whole, complete, unbroken, unimpaired, sound, in perfect condition—born of compassion: the intention to eliminate suffering for self and others without creating dependence**.”

We went over this before. So, integrity is an **intention**. It’s something that comes from the **deepest part** of our **being**. It is an impulse to reduce suffering. This is known as **compassion**. One can have compassion towards **himself**, or towards **others**. Either way, integrity is **functionally reducing suffering**, either for oneself or for others. Other than that, it has no meaning. If it’s simply about following moral principles, then it’s another relative external quality. And this leads to confusion, and it leads to not following integrity.

And finally here are some questions to get you started thinking and contemplating about the issues we go over in this video. Please take some time, sit down and think about them, and look back at your own experience and see how they show up there. And if you’re **really** brave, you can share your thoughts about these in the comments. Thanks for being with us; _Budu Saranai_.

**Exercise: Discernment**

Make sure you understand the definitions of the terms as used in the context of this video. How has confusion among these terms influenced your **thinking** in the past? Has it affected your **behavior**?

How does **disambiguation** of the definitions of **integrity, morality, ethics** and **legality** help you to apply them in practice? Can you think of any specific examples in your experience?

