# Being Integrity 

**Transcriptions**

Dev Priyānanda Svāmī Bhagavān

## Episode 1—Definitions

**Video link:** [YouTube](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2ybCezcoLao&list=PL8s1kPtHmCZI5gpsQHBcob3EXsFwcO7Si&index=2&t=8s)

_Āya Bhuwan:_ Welcome to the next installment of **Being Integrity**, where we’re going to talk about the definition of **integrity** used in this series, and also discuss the cultural limitations or assumptions that cause most people to misunderstand, not only integrity, but the entire teaching of the Buddha.

Buddha spoke on integrity often. It was a favorite theme of his. He used the word _sappurisā_, which means _sat_ or a truthful _purisā,_ man or person. So a _sappurisā_ is one who speaks the truth.

In our modern society there are so many excuses for lying, or fudging the truth, or telling little white lies. But they’re not really white because we deceive ourselves, as well as others. And once we get in that habit it’s very difficult to break. So part of integrity is being truthful; but there’s a lot more to it than that.

The dictionary definition of integrity is not very useful for our purposes. Let’s go over it though, just so we have a baseline for comparison. **Integrity** is defined as a noun, “the quality of being **honest** and having **strong moral principles**; moral uprightness,” and the example is: ‘He is known as a man of integrity’. The second definition given is “the state of being **whole** and **undivided**,” and the example is: ‘upholding territorial integrity and national sovereignty.’ Third is, “the condition of being **unified, unimpaired** or **sound** in construction,” for example: ‘the structural integrity of the novel.’ And finally, “**internal consistency** or a **lack of corruption**, \[as in electronic data\]: ‘integrity checking’.”

Well, this definition is OK; but until only about 20 or 25 years ago the **second** definition—wholeness or completeness—was actually the **primary** definition of integrity in the English language. Why did it change? Well, language changes as society changes, and the rise of fundamentalist religions has contributed to reinterpreting the word integrity, instead of meaning wholeness, to mean ‘following some moral standard.’

Now what is the problem with this? **Whose** moral standard, **which** moral standard? and when? Morality is a relative thing; it’s **external** to the personality. So if we’re following some moral code it means it’s **imposed** on us from **outside**, number one; and number two, morality **changes** over time—it’s **relative**. So the morality of New York in the 1920s, is completely different from the morality in a Buddhist monastery in Sri Lanka in the 17th century. **Which** morality are we talking about?

And it’s unfair to make an assumption and say that we accept **this** morality or **that** morality as **the** morality, when actually there are so many contradictions in different moral teachings that it’s basically a useless standard. A much **better** standard is **completeness, consistency, wholeness**, **fully functional**.

Let’s look a little bit into the etymological derivation of the word **integrity**. Integrity is from Latin, _integritatum, integritas:_ soundness, wholeness, **blamelessness**—I really like that one, blamelessness—from _integer,_ whole. For example we call a **whole number** an **integer**.

So I really like the definition of **blamelessness**, because being without blame means that one does not harm others: no one can blame him; no one can say, “He hurt me, he injured me, he harmed me,” and “He hurt my feelings,” or whatever. A person who has integrity does not cause suffering. This is the **key**: the sense of **wholeness**, in **perfect condition** is from about the mid-15th century [from [Online Etymology Dictionary](https://www.etymonline.com/search?q=integrity)], and as an outgrowth of theological commentaries on the Bible, and so on like that.

Now all this taken together leads to a very interesting, powerful **functional** definition of **integrity** as “**a state of being leading to reducing or eliminating suffering for oneself and others**.”

A person of integrity does not cause suffering, either to himself or others. And suffering is defined by the Buddha as “any kind of pain, any kind of inconvenience, any kind of anxiety.” So a person of integrity does not cause anxiety or pain, either to himself or others. That means he doesn’t do anything that has a bad _kārmik_ result; he does not participate in the causes of suffering. And that has extensive implications as far as the **process of becoming** which is given in _paṭicca-samuppāda_ or Dependent Origination. And we’re going to go deep into this teaching in this series, and show how suffering develops from our intentions.

Basically, as soon as we have a selfish intention it creates suffering, both for ourselves and for others. So the suffering is a result of _kamma,_ which is a result of our intentions. Our intentions or our desires have to be pure; they have to be based on reducing or eliminating suffering for ourselves and others. To go on: “**Defining integrity in terms of reducing suffering also allows us to render it as an objective state, which is measurable by the external activities it inspires**.”

In other words, a person of integrity is not going to cause anything that injures others. We can **measure** this, because it’s very easy to set up a system of values that eliminates all possibility of harming others; and the Buddha has done this. _Vinaya_ is a set of laws, principles or precepts followed by Buddhist monks. Laymen, or people getting ready to become monks, follow five or eight or ten of these principles. But fully ordained monks follow 227 principles.

And yet these are not rules—that’s why we don’t call them _rules_, we call them _precepts_. They are ways of **measuring integrity**. If a person’s intention is properly aligned with the intention of the Buddha to eliminate suffering, then he will automatically not transgress any of the precepts. In fact, 227 precepts isn’t even enough to describe everything. But the point is with our **intention**. If our intention is to reduce or eliminate suffering, then we automatically will avoid activities that cause pain to ourselves and others. So if we observe ourselves carefully, we can see what these are—and begin to reduce the causes of suffering.

> “**An essential factor in our definition of integrity is that the activities undertaken to reduce or eliminate suffering must not generate additional suffering as a byproduct**.”

Let me give you an example: a fundamentalist religion which says, “You just **believe** in this religion, and **after you die** you’re going to go to heaven; and you’ll be with God, and there won’t be any suffering.” Well what’s wrong with this picture? Well number one, it’s a post-dated check: “You believe **now**, you follow the rules **now**, and in the future you get the result—in the next life or after you die.” This is called a ‘post-dated check’. If I’m going to buy your car, would you take a check from me dated one month from now? Then if you’re going to select a spiritual or religious path, then why would you accept one that only gives you benefits **after you die**? Well what about **now**?

So the Buddha’s teaching is not like that. In the Buddha’s teaching, as soon as we begin to follow the principles, as soon as we understand the method by which the teaching works, we **immediately** experience a **tangible** reduction in suffering. I experienced this myself last year, when I began to practice Buddhism seriously. As soon as I began to seriously practice the principles, the precepts and the meditation, I experienced a **tremendous** reduction in suffering, and that continues to the present day. And the more advanced I become in understanding and following the Buddha’s method, the more that reduction in suffering continues and increases. So the Buddha's method gives a **tangible experience** of reduced suffering in the present, **here and now**. No post-dated check.

Second, religion requires us to **believe** in something that we cannot verify with our senses or mind. We have to have **faith**. The Buddha’s teaching does not demand faith; well, maybe a **little** faith, just enough to go into the laboratory and try the experiment. And each of us **has** the laboratory required to perform the experiment that verifies the Buddha’s teaching. That is, our own minds and hearts.

So if we go into our own minds and hearts, and observe according to the Buddha’s instructions, we’ll see the same things going on that he described. And if we perform the activities of cooling down the senses and so on that the Buddha gives, then we’ll automatically experience the result. Just like when you go into the lab in chemistry or physics class, and you actually investigate the principles you’ve been taught, you’ll see that they work. It’s the same thing; it doesn’t require a whole lot of faith, just enough faith to **try the experiment**.

The third thing that’s different between the Buddha’s teaching and the religion, is: religion requires you to obey an external authority; whereas the Buddha’s teaching does not require an external authority—you simply try the process given by the Buddha in his teachings, experience the result, and that’s it. You have **no** obligation, you don’t have to pay a monthly **tithe**, you don’t have to belong to any **organization**, you don’t have to follow a particular **teacher**, you don’t become **dependent** on or **obligated** to anything outside **yourself**.

Of course if you have integrity, then you’re going to act in such a way that other people’s suffering will **also** be reduced; and there will be some external interaction due to the process. But it’s strictly on your **own terms**; you don’t become obligated to some external organization, unless you choose to cooperate with others, as I have by becoming a monk. But still, the objective becomes to reduce or eliminate suffering, both for oneself and others.

This leads to a very interesting definition of integrity. Thus in this series we define integrity as:

> **“The objective, measurable state or condition of being whole, complete, unbroken, unimpaired, sound, in perfect condition—born of compassion: the intention to eliminate suffering for self and others without creating dependence.”**

Compassion means that we see the suffering that, both for ourselves and others, that human life makes happen to us. And then we also go deeper into it—we see the **cause** of suffering, we see the process of Dependent Origination, the process of **becoming**, and how that works. Then we go further than that, we start to create **intentions** to reduce or eliminate suffering, both for ourselves and others. And finally, we actually get on that path, and we walk that path until we get the result.

So these are the Four Noble Truths discovered by the Buddha: one is that **life is suffering**: existence and suffering go hand-in-hand. **Birth** is suffering, **life** is suffering, old age, disease, death—so many other things in our lives cause suffering. And the second is the **cause of suffering**: the Buddha gives detailed knowledge of the **process of becoming**. He calls it _paṭicca-samuppāda_ or Dependent Origination: how the process of becoming begins from desire, and proceeds through a series of interrelated causes and effects, actually winding up in our **being** the way we are. This is the second thing, the **cause** of suffering.

The third noble truth is the **cessation of suffering**. Cessation of suffering is possible; it’s not outside the realm of possibility, it can be done. And finally fourth, the Noble Eightfold Path, or the path to the cessation of suffering, which is _Nibbāna._ So these four truths—**suffering**, the **cause** of suffering, the **cessation** of suffering and the **path** to the cessation of suffering—are actually the essence of being a **person of integrity**.

Now actually, **everybody** knows that there’s suffering in life. Even little children are very well aware of it. But nobody knows the actual cause. And we can be certain of this, because if we **knew** the cause, we could **stop** it. Yet after thousands of years, none of the plans that people have come up with have stopped suffering—have actually resulted in the cessation of suffering—except the Buddha’s teaching.

For example, let’s take **government**. A government is originally a plan to **prevent**, or at least **reduce** suffering. But actually government results in more suffering than anything! Look at all the wars; look at all the unnecessary nonsense involved in politics. All of this is suffering. We use **punishment** to try to prevent people from causing harm to others. And we’ve been **using** punishment for thousands of years. We’ve been using government and politics for **thousands** of years. We’ve been using policies and religions and morality for **thousands** of years. And **none** of it has worked! None of it has stopped people from doing bad things that cause suffering to others.

The only thing that has worked is the Buddha's teaching. Anyone who follows the Buddha’s teaching becomes harmless, becomes blameless, becomes a person of integrity, a _sappurisā_. A _sappurisā_ is one who is on the Eightfold Path. A person of integrity is one who has formed the intention to reduce or eliminate suffering, both for himself and others. A person on the Eightfold Path is cognizant of the Four Noble Truths, and **this** is the definition of a human being in the full sense of the term. A person of integrity is one who understands that life is suffering; therefore one should be kind. He understands the **cause** of suffering, therefore one should act to rein in **desire** which is the cause of suffering. A person who has integrity realizes that the aim of life is **cessation** of suffering, and that it’s **possible**. And finally, he should be willing to do whatever it takes to **walk the path** to bring this about. This is a real person of integrity.