# Being Integrity 

**Transcriptions**

Dev Priyānanda Svāmī Bhagavān

## Episode 3—Discernment

**Video link:** [YouTube](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=14NW7DwjAwQ&list=PL8s1kPtHmCZI5gpsQHBcob3EXsFwcO7Si&index=4)

_Āya Bhuwan:_ may you live long!

Welcome to Episode 3 of _Being Integrity_, and today we’re going to **discern** or **recognize** integrity as compared to other types of knowledge that discuss right and wrong, such as morality, legality, ethics and so on.

Well, what does the Buddha say about integrity? He says:

“And how is a person of integrity endowed with qualities of integrity? There is the case where a person of integrity is endowed with conviction, conscience, concern; he is learned, with aroused persistence, **unmuddled mindfulness** and **good discernment**. This is **how** a person of integrity is endowed with qualities of integrity.” — [Cūḷa-puṇṇama Sutta](https://www.accesstoinsight.org/ati/tipitaka/mn/mn.110.than.html) (MN 110)

I love how the Buddha always tells us **how**; not just **what**, but **how**. So we’ll go into some of these other qualities later on in this series. But right now we want to talk about **unmuddled mindfulness** and **good discernment**.

So, to discern something means to be able to pick it out, to recognize it, to identify it even among a bunch of other similar things. So for example, if I had a pet dog, and there were a whole bunch of dogs running around, I’d be able to pick out my dog from among the pack. Similarly, there are many different ideas dealing with right and wrong, good and bad, what to do, what not to do. And we’re going to go over the **difference** between integrity and these other ideas.

We use a **positive** model of integrity; and the reason we do that is because it gives us **access** to **enhanced performance**. And we’ll get into that later on in the series. But basically, if you have integrity, you will be able to perform **far greater** than a typical person **without** integrity. And of course the same goes for groups, organizations and societies that have integrity built-in. They will have a much higher output, much greater creativity and so on than others who don’t have integrity.

In our model, we discern or recognize **four phenomena** dealing with right and wrong: **morality, ethics, legality** and **integrity**. So let’s go over those briefly. Philosophical discourse and common usage misdefine and confuse morality, ethics, legality and integrity. This causes people to misunderstand these four phenomena, so it is very difficult to apply them properly. Their integrity declines as a result.

So what **is** the difference between morality, ethics, legality and integrity? Can you tell me right off the top of your head? Probably not; and that’s a problem. It’s a problem because these words actually refer to **different** things; and unfortunately in the ordinary dictionary definitions, they are defined **in terms of one another**. So there’s a lot of **circular definitions** going on: morality is defined as ethics, ethics is defined as morality, and so on.

So in order to clear this all up we’re going to apply a special set of definitions to these terms in our series, that will keep them separate. In our model, we discern, distinguish and define morality, ethics and legality as instances of **normative** values or **virtues** about good and bad, right and wrong, or what should or should not be.

So a **normative virtue** is a **negative** thing. In other words, the cops don’t bother you until you **break** the law, and then they arrest you and throw you in jail, you see? Or the teacher doesn’t punish you until you **break** the rules, you see? It does not reward good behavior, it simply punishes bad behavior; and as I pointed out in an earlier series, punishment **does not work**.

How long have we as a human race been using punishment to try to correct people’s behavior? Thousands of years, maybe? tens of thousands of years? Has it worked? No. People still do destructive and self-destructive acts because they don’t know the difference between right and wrong. Hey wait a minute: that’s the definition of insanity, isn’t it? A person doesn’t know the difference between right and wrong, they don’t know the rules, they don’t know what’s good and bad.

That’s because they don’t have integrity. If they had integrity there would be no need for rules, because a person would **automatically avoid** any activity that was harmful. But because integrity is something not well understood, confused with other things like morality and legality, and also considered something outside the person, like following a moral code, which is simply a bunch of rules—that way people’s integrity declines. And that’s what we’ve seen. So anyway, after thousands of years of trying punishment to correct people’s behavior, isn’t it time for something new? Well, let’s look into this some more.

What is a normative virtue exactly? Well, the definition of **normative** is an adjective, “establishing, relating to, or deriving from a standard or norm, especially of behavior,” and the example given in the dictionary:

‘negative sanctions are used to enforce normative behavior.’ That’s **perfect**; it’s **exactly** what we’re talking about: either you follow the norms, which are a standard **outside** of your self, or you’ll be **punished**. **Enforced** is the word; you’ll be forced to follow the norms. If you don’t want to, too bad. So of course this is **terrible** for morale. People get **depressed** over this because they want to do X, and X isn’t allowed in whatever context they’re in. So this is the problem: **normative** rules are **external** to the person, and they’re also **negative** in intent.

Let’s go on: This term appeared in the late 19th century, from French _normatif,_ from Latin _norma,_ ‘carpenter’s square’. Back in the 50s and 60s we used to call someone who we felt was excessively moral a ‘square’: “So-and-so is a real square.” Because he’s following an external standard; he’s not **integrated**, he’s not **integral**, he doesn’t have **integrity**; he’s not **whole** and **complete** in himself; he follows some **external** rule. This is a **square**. Why is it square? Because when you follow something external, you can’t be fully **yourself**. Everybody knows this intuitively, but now we make it scientific.

And let’s look into the term **virtue**. Virtue is a noun, “behavior showing high moral standards; a morally good or desirable quality: ‘patience is a virtue’. It can also mean “a good or useful quality of a thing”; but here we’re talking about human beings, so virtue in this sense is something that’s **outside** the person. This means that in our modern context especially, it’s considered **optional**. “Well, it’s **nice** if you can tell the truth, but you know, if it gets in the way of **profits**, or social **popularity** or something like that, oh we’ll tell a little white lie.”

Well, there is no such thing as a white lie; all lies are wrong. The truth always comes out eventually and then you get caught, and the result is worse than before. But people get short-term benefit out of lying, so they still do it, even though they **know** it’s wrong—if they’re sane. And really, any life experience will tell you, you’re going to get caught. So why do it? And the answer is, people think that truthfulness is a **virtue**; it’s something **outside** ourselves that we can adopt if it’s **nice** or **convenient**, or if we have the **time**. But if we’re in a **pinch** where we have to get some **result**, we can **ditch** it. And that’s what people **do**: in the name of **expediency**, they give up **virtues** and just do whatever they **like**, whatever they think **needs to be done**.

This is the problem with **integrity**: if integrity is looked on as a **virtue**, then it’s **disposable**, it’s **dispensable**—something we can live **without**. And because it’s often more convenient to **circumvent** the rules of morality. That’s what people do.

Now, in our model integrity is discerned as an instance of **positive** values, devoid of normative content. Integrity is thus not about good or bad, right or wrong, or what should or should not be. We will not give you a set of **rules**. Yes, there is a set of rules in the Buddha’s teaching: it’s called the _vinaya_. But **functionally** speaking, the **purpose** of the _vinaya_ is not to **enforce** a certain standard of behavior, but to **measure** a person’s integrity.

If you start to look at it like that, then it becomes a whole different story. Because integrity is something that you **are**. It’s in your **being**. It’s a **quality**; it’s not something that you **possess**, or **have**, or **do**. Not something **outside** yourself, it’s something **within** you. It’s part of your **nature**. And in that way, you **spontaneously** follow the rules of morality, because you just don’t **do** things that are **harmful**; you don’t do things that are **hurtful**, because you understand _kamma_ is going to give you back the pain that you create.

Let’s go on: Furthermore, the four **phenomena** of morality, ethics, legality and integrity are distinguished as belonging to distinct **domains**. Thus the definition of each term becomes clear, unambiguous and **discrete**. Discrete means separate, in this case. So what we’re doing here is creating a model of the different systems or ways of thinking that people have used to try to regulate their behavior, to **minimize the** **harm** that people do to one another.

And of course the problem is that no set of rules can cover all circumstances; no set of rules is appropriate to different times, places, societies, languages, religions and so on. So therefore, you have all these different conflicting sets of rules. Which one do I follow? It’s very hard to figure out. So what we’re doing is we’re saying each of these terms—**morality, ethics, legality** and **integrity**—belongs to a different **domain**—a different **context**, a different set of circumstances. And now we’re going to define which one is which.

First let’s look into the definition of **positive**. We say that integrity is a **positive** feature; a **positive** quality, not a **negative** quality like normative virtues. But what do we mean by positive? Well, the dictionary defines positive as an adjective, “consisting in, or characterized by, the **presence** or **possession** of features or qualities rather than their absence; indicating the **presence** of something; **constructive** in intention or attitude; showing **optimism** and **confidence**; showing **pleasing progress**, gain or improvement.”

In philosophy, positive means “dealing only with matters of fact and experience; not speculative or theoretical.” Fact and experiences are **positive**, and speculation and theory is **negative**. Why? Because it’s not based on **experience**. It’s a nice **idea**, it’s a great **theory**, but does it really work in **practice**? Usually **not**.

So a **positive** theory of human behavior is one that looks for the **good** qualities. It’s **optimistic**; it assumes that people are basically **good** and **want** to do the right thing, they just don’t know which set of rules to apply in a particular situation. It’s very confusing; so we get **rid** of the rules. We use the rules only to **measure** a person’s integrity **after the fact**. But to actually determine what to **do**, we use an entirely **different** set of criteria, a **positive** set of criteria based on experience: **what diminishes or eliminates suffering**?

For example the Buddha, when he created the _vinaya—_which are the 227 precepts followed by Buddhist monks—he didn’t just make these things up and say, “Well, this is a great **theory**, let’s follow these rules.” No. What happened was he observed the behavior of the monks, and anytime someone did something that caused **suffering**, he would make a rule about it. In other words, the _vinaya_ is not based on theory or speculation, it’s based on **experience**: “So-and-so did this, and it caused **suffering**, so let’s stop doing that.” You see the difference? It’s not just based on theology or philosophy or logic, it’s based on actual experience. That makes all the difference in the world.

So our model of integrity is based on a distinction between **normative values**—virtues, which are basically **negative**, speculative and theoretical in nature—and positive values, which are **optimistic** and are based on **experience**. And then we make a distinction between different **domains**. For example, in the **social virtue** domain we have **morality**. In the **group virtue** domain we have **ethics**, and in the **legal virtue** domain we have **legality**.

Now all these virtues are **external** to the person himself. They’re external sets of rules, and thus they cause **confusion** about which one to apply in a certain situation. Morality might dictate that we do one thing, ethics another, and legality something completely different. So it’s really **confusing**. But in the domain of **positive** values we have the **objective** domain. The objective domain is based on **experience**. It’s based on **reality** and sense perception. And that gives us **integrity**, which we define as “**the state or condition of being whole, complete, unbroken, fully functional, sound etc. and based on compassion: the intention to eliminate suffering without dependence**.”

This **distinguishes** integrity from all other forms of social and behavioral values.

Now let’s look into the definitions of some of these other things—morality, ethics and so on—and see **how** they differ from our conception of integrity. Let’s start by defining **morality**. Morality is a noun, “the principles concerning the distinction between right and wrong, or good and bad behavior.” Well, that’s nice; but **whose** morality? Morality is a relative term. Morality in New York in the 1920s is completely different from morality in a Buddhist monastery. Morality in California in the 1960s is completely different from Chinese morality. So the question is, which morality are we going to follow? Do we follow the morality that is given by religion? Do we follow the morality given by our corporation? You see, it’s a problem. “A particular system of values and principles of conduct, especially one held by a specified person or society; for example, ‘the bourgeois morality’.” Another definition: “the **extent** to which an action is right or wrong: ‘behind all arguments lies the issue of the morality of the possession of nuclear weapons’.”

So what is right? What is wrong? Who decides? If it doesn’t come down to the **individual**, then you have an **external** set of values. And this is always going to reduce **productivity**, reduce **energy**, reduce **creativity**. We’ll see how this works later on in the series, but I want to introduce this now, so that it’s really clear.

Let’s go on. Definition of ethics: noun, “moral principles that govern a person’s or group’s behavior: ‘judeo-christian ethics’; the moral correctness of specified conduct: ‘the ethics of euthanasia’.” So you see how these terms are cross-defined they’re defined in terms of **one another**. So unless you bring in the idea of a **domain**, and say that **morality** applies to the **social** domain; **ethics** applies to the **organizational** domain; you’re going to get confusion.

So **morality** is a system of right and wrong dictated by a **society**, whereas **ethics** is dictated by an **organization**. That means you can have a **social** idea of right and wrong, such as, “I never lie,” and then your **organization** can override that because, well, you work in the marketing department, and marketing is **nothing but** lies. So if you want to keep your job, you break your **morality** to keep your **ethics**. Or let’s put it this way: different organizations may be in competition with one another, so it’s **OK**, or it’s **ethical** to benefit **my** organization while attacking **another** organization of the same type. That’s group ethics; it’s relative. Just like **morality** is relative to **society**, **ethics** is relative to an **organization**. That distinguishes morality from ethics, but it **still** doesn’t solve the problem of **which** ethics or **which** morality we’re going to observe.

And now the definition of **legality**. Legality is a noun, “the quality or state of being in accordance with the law: ‘documentation testifying to the legality of the arms sale’; or obligation imposed by law.’ So then, the question again is, **which** law? If I’m in France, do I follow French law or American law? The problem is, the law can change in a heartbeat; all it takes is the administrative head or legislature voting to change the law, and that’s it. What was legal yesterday is now illegal today, or vice versa. Tomorrow the whole thing can change again.

So **legality, morality** and **ethics** are all **external**, and they cause **confusion** because they’re **relative** and **changeable**. What’s legal or moral today can change tomorrow. It just depends on the fashion, or the overriding consensus of the society, the rules of the particular organization, or the laws enacted by the government.

Let’s take a look again at the dictionary definition of **integrity**. Integrity is a noun, “The quality of being honest and having strong moral principles; moral uprightness: ‘He is known to be a man of integrity’.” 2—“The state of being whole and undivided: ‘upholding territorial integrity and national sovereignty’.” 3—“The condition of being unified. unimpaired or sound in construction: ‘the structural integrity of the novel’.” And 4—“Internal consistency or lack of corruption \[as in electronic data\]: ‘integrity checking’.”

So let’s look at **our** definition of integrity. Our definition of integrity is based on the **functional** definition, that “**Integrity is a state of being leading to reducing or eliminating suffering for self and others**.” This is **positive**; this is **functional**; this is based on **experience**. If you have integrity, you’re going to be suffering **less** than others who **don’t** have integrity. It’s **experiential**: you can experience it for yourself. If I tell the truth, and I always tell the truth, and I can be **counted on** for telling the truth, then I will live a better quality of existence than someone who lies. In our series _Being Integrity_ we define integrity as:

> “**The objective, measurable state or condition of being whole, complete, unbroken, unimpaired, sound, in perfect condition—born of compassion: the intention to eliminate suffering for self and others without creating dependence**.”

We went over this before. So, integrity is an **intention**. It’s something that comes from the **deepest part** of our **being**. It is an impulse to reduce suffering. This is known as **compassion**. One can have compassion towards **himself**, or towards **others**. Either way, integrity is **functionally reducing suffering**, either for oneself or for others. Other than that, it has no meaning. If it’s simply about following moral principles, then it’s another relative external quality. And this leads to confusion, and it leads to not following integrity.

And finally here are some questions to get you started thinking and contemplating about the issues we go over in this video. Please take some time, sit down and think about them, and look back at your own experience and see how they show up there. And if you’re **really** brave, you can share your thoughts about these in the comments. Thanks for being with us; _Budu Saranai_.

**Exercise: Discernment**

Make sure you understand the definitions of the terms as used in the context of this video. How has confusion among these terms influenced your **thinking** in the past? Has it affected your **behavior**?

How does **disambiguation** of the definitions of **integrity, morality, ethics** and **legality** help you to apply them in practice? Can you think of any specific examples in your experience?

