# Being Integrity 

**Transcriptions**

Dev Priyānanda Svāmī Bhagavān

## Episode 2—Preliminaries

**Video link:** [YouTube](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CAyJxOqrPqQ&list=PL8s1kPtHmCZI5gpsQHBcob3EXsFwcO7Si&index=3)

_Āya Bhuwan:_ may you live long!

Welcome to episode two of **Being Integrity**, where we establish a firm foundation for your progress in this series. **Why** is integrity so difficult? Sometimes when we try to explain it to people, it’s as if we’re speaking a **foreign language**. But actually, integrity has been **trained** out of us; it has been **socialized** out of us; it has been basically **beaten** out of us by a society surrounding us that’s completely out-of-integrity itself.

The government is spying on everybody, they’re lying to the press, to the Congress; businesses are stabbing each other in the back; there’s all kinds of covert wars and stuff going on all over the planet—and these are the **leaders**! So if the leaders are like that, then imagine what the rest of the population must be. In school, it’s supposed to be about education; but it’s actually just about **social conditioning**, about training easy-to-manage workers for the industrial corporations.

So we’re not really getting what we’re promised in any area of life: **government** is corrupt, **business** is corrupt, **school** is corrupt, **families** are corrupt; people are **cheating** on each other, nobody’s following any kind of moral standards. It’s very rare, and when they **do**, it’s only because of **external coercion** like a church, or because they’re afraid of getting **caught**.

So we live in a world where being out-of-integrity is **pervasive**, and to **get along** in that world we often find ourselves **compromising** what we **know** is right and wrong, in order to get by. It’s a pretty sad state of affairs. But this is the typical consciousness that we find in the world today. We want to **do** something about this; we want to **encourage** and **help** people to **regain** their integrity, and to become a **fully integrated, whole, fully functional human being**.

Why? Because without integrity, without the **intention** to reduce suffering or eliminate suffering for ourselves **and** others, we are less than fully human. A full human being—human being in the full sense of the term—is one who is committed to **reducing** or **eliminating** suffering for **everyone**. Of course, this is a Buddha, or at least an _arahant:_ a fully Self-realized person.

So a full human being is something very far **above** the average human being of today. Yet **without** integrity, we cannot even take a small step toward that platform. We’re stuck in the **subhuman** consciousness of thinking we are the body; we’re thinking we are some abstract designation related to our social or economic or political status. That is a **conditioned** state of consciousness. It’s not **real** consciousness; it’s consciousness in terms of some **symbolic representation** or some **abstract relationship** that we take on and say, “This is my self.”

We’re going to get into this, or actually we have already gone into a deep analysis of how we construct the false ego in our [Cup of Tea](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PL8s1kPtHmCZKF70TBItSZS4auuEUCbaTo) series, so we’re not going to repeat all that here. But what we are going to say is that you should **develop better integrity**. Everything about your life will improve if you do. So this is our message in this series, that “Please improve, increase, enhance and develop your integrity, and you will be very pleasantly surprised at how much your life will improve.”

Now there are a few things you need to know before we begin the actual training part of this series. And the first thing is that this is not ordinary education; this is not a regular online course. This is what we call **ontological education**. It’s not regular education, and it’s not training. Nobody’s going to stand over you and make sure that you do what’s in the lessons. You have to be responsible **yourself**; you have to take the initiative **yourself** to develop your integrity to a higher degree.

And furthermore, we are talking about a subject that is rarely examined in Western society, and that is, **being**. People talk about having and doing and knowing and thinking, but they don’t really talk about **being**. So we’re going to have to introduce a whole new language, a whole **network** of technical terminology about **being**. That is so that we can describe the subject matter of this course, which is **being**: **how** you are being, and **what** you are being. And that’s why it’s called **Being Integrity**.

So there are a few **prerequisites**, and we’ll cover those in the next slide. But for right now I want you to know this is **ontological education**—it’s about **being**. And when we cover a point, you should take that information and **think** about it. **Contemplate** it, review it in your mind, reflect upon it, and look into your own life, your own experience, and see if you can find it, or evidence for it, in your own experience. This is called **phenomenological self-analysis**, and it’s a very important part of our training.

In fact, without it the training doesn’t work. You have to do the work; nobody can do it for you. No matter how clever a presenter I am—which is not very, really—but as far as I can I’ll give you the information. You have to **do** something with it: you have to sit down and do the work. You have to do the contemplation. Turn off the phone, lock the door, tell everybody not to bug you for a while. Sit down and **contemplate** this material; look into **yourself** and try to understand **how** this reflects in your own experience.

You have to be ready to **examine** your **assumptions** about life. Your assumptions about life are the things that you **assume** to be true without really having any proof. The prime example is the existence of “I”, the self, the ego. We assume that we have a permanent self, or actually an eternal self—the **soul**. In western language, in Western culture, religion and philosophy the existence of the soul is taken for granted.

But can you show me your soul, or anybody’s soul? Can you show me **my** soul? Can you actually observe the soul? Can you prove the existence of the soul? No, of course not. That’s because the soul is an imaginary entity: the self, the ego, the “I”, the personality, the person is an imaginary thing we constructed in our own minds out of our sense impressions. And we’ve already covered how we do that in great detail in the video on the [Mūla-pariyāya Sutta](https://youtu.be/-Bn4_6x-GHw), the root sequence. And so we’re not going to go into that in detail right now, but we’re going to refer you to that video.

Now what I want you to think about, and what I want you to take a look at is to be **open** to examining your assumptions. Just be **ready**, if anything we say clashes with your **beliefs** about life, to take a **look** at it and see, “Well, is that really so? Can I **know** this, can I **prove** this? Or am I merely **assuming** it?” as in the case of the self, the “I”?

The Buddha says, **_anicca dukkha anāttā_**. These are the three characteristics of reality. _Anicca_ means impermanent, _dukkha_ means suffering, and _anāttā_ means no-self. The Buddha says, “There is no self or anything related to a self.” In other words, no possessions either. These are all **illusory**, these are simply **designations**, they’re simply **labels** that we **concoct** out of words. They don’t have any real existence.

Just like a **corporation**: I was making the example, a bunch of people get together and put some words on paper and get some other people to sign it, and **boom** they have a corporation. Where is that corporation exactly? Can you **show** it to me, can you prove its existence? “Well, it says right here on this sheet of paper…” No, those are just words on paper. There is no corporation; there is no such thing as a **country**, there is no such thing as a **club**, a **group**, a **class** of people. These are all simply **labels**, they’re all simply words. And we **act as if** they are real, but they’re actually only **assumptions**.

So in this course, one of the things we have to do is take a **really good close look** at our assumptions about life: what we **assume** to be true, or what we take for **granted** about life that is actually just a **label**, just **words**, just a **description** of what we would **like** to be true, instead of what really **is**.

So this is **ontological education**. Now to get the most out of this series you really should review our previous series in the **Skillful Living** series. There are four of them: **Skillful Living 1** is the [Foundation Series](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PL8s1kPtHmCZKmgES4E6Lnrqu9Sdt4_786), and that deals with **our** assumptions, **our** background knowledge and the truths that **we** accept as true, before going into **any** of the other subjects that we cover in any other series, including this one. So you should **definitely** review the _Foundation Series_. I’ll give a live link on the YouTube version of this, otherwise you have to go look it up.

The second one is [Becoming Genius](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PL8s1kPtHmCZKSDrnl37T9M163BHPUSOr5) (aka _Matrix Learning_). Now _Becoming Genius_ is based on my own experience of **how to learn**. First we have to **learn how to learn**. If you try to go through this series without having assimilated the learning technology that we give in _Becoming Genius_, you won’t get much out of it. You won’t know how to look up your **misunderstood terms**; you won’t know how to **model** the systems that we’re giving; you won’t understand what an **ontological model** is; you won’t understand what a **terministic screen** is; and so on and so forth.

We’re going to **assume** in this series that you **know** these things. So you better review that material, otherwise you’re going to be **lost**. Because we’re using a lot of terminology out of that series to **speed up** the learning process.

Number three is [Being in the World](http://www.apple.com). _Being in the World_ is an **ontological analysis of ordinary life**. We’re going to take a lot of the conclusions from _Being in the World_ as **assumptions** in this series. We go through everything in **detail** in _Being in the World_ and the accompanying study series, that **analyze** and ask **questions** for you to think about. So until you’ve gone through that material—at least have acquaintance with it, if not a deep realization of it—a lot of what’s in **this** series is going to seem really far out, and it’s going to contradict your sense of who you are, what you are, what you’re doing here.

The Buddha’s teaching is not like any other field of knowledge in existence. It’s completely unique and special. So because this series is based on the Buddha's teaching, we take as **given** many things that are **counterintuitive** for the average Western person, the average english-speaking person. So you really should review _Being in the World_ to get a handle on our background assumptions.

And finally, [Call of the Friend](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PL8s1kPtHmCZLRgENn9pPgjPhORkY_7GVQ). _Call of the Friend_ is a series about what happens when you get the opportunity to investigate and experience **transcendental wisdom**. That’s what the teaching of the Buddha is: transcendental wisdom, beyond all other systems of knowledge, beyond oneness, beyond nothingness, beyond everything that’s ever existed before on this planet Earth. And that’s why I became a **monk**, because the Buddha’s teaching is just **beyond everything**.

So the **insights** from that teaching are something that most people never get a chance to come in contact with. This series, and our other work, gives you an opportunity to really hang out with the Buddha’s teaching in a different way—not in a formal or religious setting, but simply going over the questions of life, and profiling the **value** of the opportunity to hang out with somebody who actually knows these things, and has realized some of them. So please go through these four **Skillful Living** series: the [Foundation Series](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PL8s1kPtHmCZKmgES4E6Lnrqu9Sdt4_786)**_,_** [Becoming Genius](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PL8s1kPtHmCZKSDrnl37T9M163BHPUSOr5)**_,_** [Being in the World](http://www.apple.com) and [Call of the Friend](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PL8s1kPtHmCZLRgENn9pPgjPhORkY_7GVQ)_._

We considered these prerequisites to this series, and we’re going to be **building** on a lot of the ideas that are presented in **detail** in those prior series. So do yourself a favor: If you want to get the **maximum value** from _Being Integrity_, then go through the previous series.

Now besides the background material, there are **four important principles** that you need to keep in mind when viewing this series. And the first one is to **show up fully present**. In other words, when you watch this video, don’t have any distractions; don’t let anything interrupt you; turn off your phone, turn off the beeper, lock your door, make sure you’re not going to be disturbed; and concentrate on **the experience of watching**. Because you need to be **fully present**, and have your **full attention** focused on the video in order to **get** this material; it’s **very deep**. You have to **participate with integrity**, and integrity means **wholeness**, fullness. So that means you need to have your whole self **available** to this material, to **confront** the meaning and to reflect on it, and see **how it** **shows up** in your experience.

You also need to **be yourself authentically**. In other words, don’t think, “Well, what are my friends gonna think if I start talking about this integrity stuff?” Hey, your friends don’t need to know anything about it. Your friends are going to be surprised very pleasantly if you get anything out of this, and you change and improve your integrity. So they’ll be pleased; but just leave them out of it for now. **You participate** in this experience, **being authentically yourself**—what **you** really think and who **you** really are. That’s what will do **you** the most good.

Now, another thing is, you have to **look up** and **clear** your **misunderstood terms** as discussed in the _Becoming Genius_ series. This is **so** important, I wish I could stress properly **how** important this is. Well, how important is it? It’s like if your **hair was on fire**. OK? It’s **that** important. You know, if your hair was on fire, you would be pretty focused on putting it out, wouldn’t you? OK, so if you encounter a misunderstood term, you should be **that** concerned about getting it cleared up and properly understood. Well, what is a misunderstood term? Watch _Becoming Genius_, will you please? Watch _Becoming Genius_, especially the second one on [Duplication](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AaszxSWPFbQ&list=PL8s1kPtHmCZKSDrnl37T9M163BHPUSOr5&index=4), because that’s the one that covers looking up misunderstood terms.

You **have** to look up your misunderstood terms. I used a word a little while ago, **ontology**. Can you define ontology? If you can’t, you need to look it up. Oh that’s a **not-understood term**. A **misunderstood term** would be if I say, “Look it **up**.” What’s the definition of **up**? Ah, see? You can’t quote it, can you? You have to look it up in the dictionary, because that misunderstanding will build on previous misunderstandings that you have, especially from **school**, and it will cause you to be to **not be fully present** with your **full attention** and be able to absorb the material.

So I know this from experience, because I started looking up words in high school, and I went from a C student to an A student, and got **perfect scores** in my college board tests, OK? So if you look up your misunderstood words you will become **a lot smarter**, and that’s what we want.

Now further, it will really help if you are **committed** to **something greater** than **yourself**. In other words, you need to have a **reason** for living, a **cause**, a **purpose** greater than just ‘getting what I want’ or ‘being happy,’ or whatever small purpose is within the scope of your human life. You need to have something **bigger** than you that you’re **committed** to. Well, why is that? Because if you’re only committed to yourself that makes you **selfish**, by definition; and a selfish person **cannot** have integrity. Well, why is that? Because they don’t care about anybody else. And we have already defined integrity as **someone who’s committed to reducing or eliminating suffering both for themselves and others**. So you need to be committed to, and **care** enough about **others** that you want to reduce or eliminate suffering for them as well.

That’s another part of what it takes to be a **full human being**. So if you don’t have something **beyond yourself** that you’re fully committed to—for example, I’m fully committed to the _saṅgha_ of the Buddha; I’ve become a monk; I’ve taken refuge for life in the Buddha, the Dhamma and the _saṅgha._ So that’s being committed to something greater than yourself. I’m showing by example how you do that. But it doesn’t **have** to be becoming a monk, it could be your **family**, it could be your **business**, it could be something, a cause—anything that’s bigger than you. You need to be fully committed to that, **and** to share the benefits of what you learn here in that commitment as well, in that relationship. That will get you the **maximum** benefit from this course. Because you need to be **bigger** than just an ordinary human being.

Finally, you need to be **willing** to be **at cause** over **changing your being**. This is a **hugely important** point. We discussed this earlier, in the video on [Being and Becoming](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CV4vx49hPCA&list=PL8s1kPtHmCZKmgES4E6Lnrqu9Sdt4_786&index=2&t=4s) in the _Foundation Series_. That if you’re going to stop suffering—even for **yourself**, what to speak of anybody else—you have to **become** something different than what you are today. It’s like, are you suffering? “Yes.” So if you stay the same you’re going to continue to suffer, right? So you have to **change your being**, you have to **become something different** than what you are today to stop your suffering, and to also help others stop theirs.

See how logical it is? It’s totally logical. And not only that, life experience tells us that this is so. Because then why would we be interested in a better job, a better car, nicer clothes, a better relationship or so on and so forth, or improving in **any** area of life, if we’re not willing to **change our being**? The fact is, we have to **die** to who we are **today** to **become** the person we **want** to be **tomorrow**. This is just a fact of life. We have to be willing to **let go** of who we are now—the person that we **wound up being**, often by circumstance or by accident—and **become** the person we really **want to be**. For the future depends on our changing our being; both **our** future and the future of the people **around** us. So you be willing to be at cause over changing your being to get the full benefit of this series.

Let’s talk some more about terminology. Our _Being Integrity_ series uses a certain **technical terminology**. And **you might think**—and other people might even agree—that we **could** say things in a much simpler way. We could use terminology that’s a lot more down-to-earth or whatever. But this is actually not true. We’re trying to make certain distinctions between the **ordinary** way of being, and a **new** way of being that’s based on **complete integrity**. So in order to do that, we have to use certain terms; and we have to use those terms in a certain **way**.

Let me give you an example if I say the word **presenting**, what does it sound like; a show, right? “And now presenting _Rocky and Bullwinkle_…” or something like that. But what if I’m a doctor? If a doctor uses the word **presenting** he’s talking about the symptomology of a patient: “The patient was presenting warts,” for example, or sniffles or whatever the symptoms are. So when a doctor uses the word **presenting** he uses it in a **different** sense than someone who is talking about a television show. Why? Because the doctor has a **network of terminology** describing the states of the patient, which is **very** **useful** for his work. And sometimes this includes using ordinary words in a special way, or using **special** words that have no equivalent **outside** the field of medicine. If I say, for example, a **tracheotomy—**that has really no meaning outside of medicine. Now I could say, “We’re going to shove a tube down your throat,” but that wouldn’t really give the technical meaning, the same meaning that **tracheotomy** does.

So, what we’re talking about here is creating a **model of terms** that describe **how** a particular subject **works**. In the case of a doctor, for example, their terminology describes how **symptomology** and how different treatments **work**; how the human body and metabolism work. In the case of an airline pilot, their terms describe how **flying** works, how **airplanes** work, how air traffic control and navigation, and so on, work in the context of flying an airplane. Same with a musician, or even a plumber; they each have their **shop talk**; they each have their specific terminology used to describe their area of expertise and specialization.

So also in the science of **being**. We have a specific **network of terminology**, beginning with the word **ontology** and **ontics**. You should look these words up. Get **really clear** on them, and whenever we introduce a new term, we’ll describe it briefly. Maybe we’ll define it in detail if it’s required by the presentation. But it’s up to **you** to **look up these words** and to understand what we’re **doing** with them. We’re trying to build a **network**, a **model** that shows **how** the **process of being** works.

Now, the Buddha has already done this. He’s built a model which is called Dependent Origination—_paṭicca-samuppāda_—and we’re going to go into this model, and the building blocks of it, and the terminology and so forth, very very deeply in this series. Because it is the **working part** of **how we change our being**. We’re changing our being all the time anyway; but we’re changing it in a way that is **not** based on full knowledge of being and becoming. When we get that knowledge, **then** we see how we could use this thing in a much better way. If I have a car and a set of tools, and I take the tools and I start messing around on the car, it’s more likely I’m going to break something than fix it, if I don’t know what I’m doing. But if I’ve been to mechanic school, and I have all the manuals at hand, and I know exactly what I’m doing, then I can fix the car. Similarly, if you **know** the **process of being**, even though everyone is involved in this process already, if you have **deep knowledge** of it, you can use it so much more effectively, just like the trained mechanic can use those tools much more effectively than the weekend shade-tree mechanic.